<Climate Change mitigation>
Climate change mitigation is action to limit climate change by reducing emissions of greenhouse gases or removing those gases from the atmosphere.
2239  The recent rise in global average temperature is mostly caused by emissions from fossil fuels burning .
Mitigation can reduce emissions by transitioning to sustainable energy sources, conserving energy, and increasing efficiency.
In addition, CO2 can be removed from the atmosphere by enlarging forests, restoring wetlands and using other natural and technical processes, which are grouped together under the term of carbon sequestration.
12 Solar energy and wind power have the highest climate change mitigation potential at lowest cost compared to a range of other options.
Variable availability of sunshine and wind is addressed by energy storage and improved electrical grids, including longdistance electricity transmission, demand management and diversification of renewables.
As lowcarbon power is more widely available, transportation and heating can increasingly rely on these sources.
1  Energy efficiency is improved using heat pumps and electric vehicles.
If industrial processes must create carbon dioxide, carbon capture and storage can reduce net emissions.Greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture include methane as well as nitrous oxide.
Emissions from agriculture can be mitigated by reducing food waste, switching to a more plantbased diet, by protecting ecosystems and by improving farming processes.
XXV Climate change mitigation policies include carbon pricing by carbon taxes and carbon emission trading, easing regulations for renewable energy deployment, reductions of fossil fuel subsidies, and divestment from fossil fuels, and subsidies for clean energy.
Current policies are estimated to produce global warming of about 2.7 °C by 2100.
This warming is significantly above the 2015 Paris Agreements goal of limiting global warming to well below 2 °C and preferably to 1.5 °C.
Globally, limiting warming to 2 °C may result in higher benefits than costs.
<Definitions and scope>
The overall aim of climate change mitigationto sustain ecosystems so that human civilisation can be maintainedrequires that greenhouse gas emissions be cut drastically.
1 to 64  Accordingly, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  defines mitigation  as a human intervention to reduce emissions or enhance the sinks of greenhouse gases.
2239 Some publications describe solar radiation management solar geoengineeringas a climate mitigation technology.
Unrelated to greenhouse gas mitigation, SRM would work by changing the way Earth receives solar radiation.
14 to 56  Examples include reducing the amount of sunlight reaching the surface, reducing optical thickness and cloud lifetime, and changing surface reflectivity.
The IPCC describes SRM as a climate risk reduction strategy or supplementary option but not as a climate mitigation option.
14 to 56 Mitigation measures can be approached in parallel, as there is no single pathway to limit global warming to 1.5 or 2 °C.
109  Such measures can be categorized as follows
Sustainable energy and sustainable transport
Energy conservation 
For agricultural production and industrial processes sustainable agriculture and green industrial policy
Enhancing carbon sinks Carbon dioxide removal Carbon dioxide removal  is defined as Anthropogenic activities removing carbon dioxide  from the atmosphere and durably storing it in geological, terrestrial, or ocean reservoirs, or in products.
It includes existing and potential anthropogenic enhancement of biological or geochemical CO2 sinks and direct air carbon dioxide capture and storage , but excludes natural CO2 uptake not directly caused by human activities.The terminology in this area is still evolving.
The term geoengineering  is sometimes used in the scientific literature for both CDR or SRM , if the techniques are used at a global scale.
6 to 11  The terms geoengineering or climate engineering are no longer used in IPCC reports.
<Cobenefits>
There are also cobenefits of climate change mitigation.
For example, in the transport sector, possible cobenefits of mitigation strategies include air quality improvements, health benefits, and more public transport options.
SPM41  The increased use of green and blue infrastructure can reduce the urban heat island effect and therefore heat stress on people.
TS66  Climate change mitigation might also lead to less inequality and poverty.
<Climate change adaptation>
Some mitigation measures have cobenefits in the area of climate change adaptation.
8 to 63  This is for example the case for many naturebased solutions.
4 to 94  6  Examples in the urban context include urban green and blue infrastructure which provide mitigation as well as adaptation benefits.
This can be in the form of urban forests and street trees, green roofs and walls, urban agriculture and so forth.
The mitigation is achieved through the conservation and expansion of carbon sinks and reduced energy use of buildings.
Adaptation benefits are provided for example through reduced heat stress and flooding risk.
8 to 64 
<Health>
Mitigation measures may have many health cobenefits  potential measures can not only mitigate future health impacts from climate change but also improve health directly.
Globally the cost of limiting warming to 2 °C is less than the value of the extra years of life due to cleaner air  and in India and China much less.
Air quality improvement is a nearterm benefit among the many societal benefits from climate change mitigation, including substantial health benefits.
Studies suggest that demandside climate change mitigation solutions have largely beneficial effects on 18 constituents of wellbeing.
<Emission trends and pledges>
Greenhouse gas emissions from human activities strengthen the greenhouse effect, contributing to climate change.
Most is carbon dioxide from burning fossil fuels coal, oil, and natural gas.
Humancaused emissions have increased atmospheric carbon dioxide by about 50 over preindustrial levels.
Emissions in the 2010s averaged 56 billion tons a year,  higher than ever before.
In 2016, energy  was responsible for 73.2 of GHG emissions, direct industrial processes for 5.2, waste for 3.2 and agriculture, forestry and land use for 18.4.Electricity generation and transport are major emitters the largest single source is coalfired power stations with 20 of greenhouse gas emissions.
Deforestation and other changes in land use also emit carbon dioxide and methane.
The largest sources of anthropogenic methane emissions are agriculture, and gas venting and fugitive emissions from the fossilfuel industry.
The largest agricultural methane source is livestock.
Agricultural soils emit nitrous oxide, partly due to fertilizers.
The problem of fluorinated gases from refrigerants has been politically solved now so many countries have ratified the Kigali Amendment.Carbon dioxide  is the dominant emitted greenhouse gas, while methane  emissions almost have the same shortterm impact.
Nitrous oxide  and fluorinated gases  play a minor role.
Livestock and manure produce 5.8 of all greenhouse gas emissions, although this depends on the time horizon used for the global warming potential of the respective gas.Greenhouse gas  emissions are measured in CO2 equivalents determined by their global warming potential , which depends on their lifetime in the atmosphere.
There are widelyused greenhouse gas accounting methods that convert volumes of methane, nitrous oxide and other greenhouse gases to carbon dioxide equivalents.
Estimations largely depend on the ability of oceans and land sinks to absorb these gases.
Shortlived climate pollutants  including methane, hydrofluorocarbons , tropospheric ozone and black carbon persist in the atmosphere for a period ranging from days to 15 years, whereas carbon dioxide can remain in the atmosphere for millennia.Satellites are increasingly being used for locating and measuring greenhouse gas emissions and deforestation.
Earlier, scientists largely relied on or calculated estimates of greenhouse gas emissions and governments selfreported data.
<Needed emissions cuts>
The annual Emissions Gap Report by UNEP stated in 2022 To get on track for limiting global warming to 1.5°C, global annual GHG emissions must be reduced by 45 per cent compared with emissions projections under policies currently in place in just eight years, and they must continue to decline rapidly after 2030, to avoid exhausting the limited remaining atmospheric carbon budget.
xvi  The report also commented that the world should focus on broadbased economywide transformations instead of focusing on incremental change.
xvi In 2022, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  released its Sixth Assessment Report on climate change, warning that greenhouse gas emissions must peak before 2025 at the latest and decline 43 by 2030, in order to likely limit global warming to 1.5 °C .
Secretarygeneral of the United Nations, António Guterres, clarified that for this Main emitters must drastically cut emissions starting this year.
<Pledges>
Climate Action Tracker described the situation on 9 November 2021 as follows the global temperature will rise by 2.7 °C by the end of the century with current policies and by 2.9 °C with nationally adopted policies.
The temperature will rise by 2.4 °C if only the pledges for 2030 are implemented, by 2.1 °C if the longterm targets are also achieved.
If all the announced targets are fully achieved the rise in global temperature will peak at 1.9 °C and go down to 1.8 °C by the year 2100.
All the information about all climate pledges is sent to the Global Climate Action Portal  Nazca.
The scientific community is checking their fulfillment.While the status of most goals set for 2020 have not been evaluated in a definitive and detailed way or reported on by the media, the world failed to meet most or all international goals set for that year.As the 2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference occurred in Glasgow, the group of researchers running the Climate Action Tracker reported that of countries responsible for 85 of greenhouse gas emissions, only four polities   EU, UK, Chile and Costa Rica  have published a detailed official policyplan that describes the steps and ways by which 2030 mitigation targets could be realized.
<Emissions and economic growth>
Some have said that economic growth is a key driver of CO2 emissions.
707  However later  others have said that economic growth no longer means higher emissions.
As the economy expands, demand for energy and energyintensive goods increases, pushing up CO2 emissions.
On the other hand, economic growth may drive technological change and increase energy efficiency.
Economic growth may be associated with specialization in certain economic sectors.
If specialization is in energyintensive sectors, specifically carbon energy sources, then there will be a strong link between economic growth and emissions growth.
If specialization is in less energyintensive sectors, e.g.
the services sector, then there might be a weak link between economic growth and emissions growth.
Much of the literature focuses on the environmental Kuznets curve  hypothesis, which posits that at early stages of development, pollution per capita and GDP per capita move in the same direction.
Beyond a certain income level, emissions per capita will decrease as GDP per capita increase, thus generating an invertedU shaped relationship between GDP per capita and pollution.
However, the econometrics literature did not support either an optimistic interpretation of the EKC hypothesis  i.e., that the problem of emissions growth will solve itself  or a pessimistic interpretation  i.e., that economic growth is irrevocably linked to emissions growth.
Instead, it was suggested that there was some degree of flexibility between economic growth and emissions growth.
<Lowcarbon power>
The energy system, which includes the delivery and use of energy, is the main emitter of CO2.
6 to 6  Rapid and deep reductions in the CO2 and greenhouse gas emissions from the energy sector are needed to limit global warming to well below 2 °C.
6 to 3  Measures recommended by the IPCC include reduced fossil fuel consumption, increased production from low and zero carbon energy sources, and increased use of electricity and alternative energy carriers.
6 to 3 Most scenarios and strategies expect to see a major increase in the use of renewable energy in combination with increased energy efficiency measures.
xxiii  The deployment of renewable energy would have to be accelerated sixfoldthough to keep global warming under 2 °C.
The competitiveness of renewable energy is a key to a rapid deployment.
In 2020, onshore wind and solar photovoltaics were the cheapest source for new bulk electricity generation in many regions.
Although renewables may have higher storage costs nonrenewables may have higher cleanup costs.
A carbon price can increase the competitiveness of renewable energy.
<Solar and wind energy>
Wind and sun can be sources for large amounts of lowcarbon energy at competitive production costs.
The IPCC estimates that these two mitigation options have the largest emission reduction potential before 2030 at low cost.
Solar photovoltaics  has become the cheapest way to generate electricity in many regions of the world.
The growth of photovoltaics has been close to exponential and has about doubled every three years since the 1990s.
A different technology is concentrated solar power  using mirrors or lenses to concentrate a large area of sunlight onto a receiver.
With CSP, the energy can be stored for a few hours, providing supply in the evening.
Solar water heating doubled between 2010 and 2019.
Regions in the higher northern and southern latitudes have the highest potential for wind power.
Offshore wind farms are more expensive but the units deliver more energy per installed capacity with less fluctuations.
In most regions, wind power generation is higher in the winter when PV output is low for this reason, combinations of wind and solar power lead to betterbalanced systems.
<Other renewables>
Other wellestablished renewable energy forms include hydropower, bioenergy and geothermal energy
Hydroelectricity is electricity generated by hydropower and plays a leading role in countries like Brazil, Norway and China.
but there are geographical limits and environmental issues.
Tidal power can be used in coastal regions.
Bioenergy can provide energy for electricity, heat and transport.
Bioenergy, in particular biogas, can provide dispatchable electricity generation.
While burning plantderived biomass releases CO2, the plants withdraw CO2 from the atmosphere while they grow.
How a fuel is produced, transported and processed has a significant impact on lifecycle emissions.
Renewable biofuels are starting to be used in aviation.
Geothermal power is electrical power generated from geothermal energy.
Geothermal electricity generation is currently used in 26 countries, while geothermal heating is in use in 70 countries.
<Integrating variable renewable energy>
Wind and solar power production does not consistently match demand.
To deliver reliable electricity from variable renewable energy sources such as wind and solar, electrical power systems require flexibility.
Most electrical grids were constructed for nonintermittent energy sources such as coalfired power plants.
As larger amounts of solar and wind energy are integrated into the grid, changes have to be made to the energy system to ensure that the supply of electricity is matched to demand.There are various ways to make the electricity system more flexible.
In many places, wind and solar generation are complementary on a daily and a seasonal scale there is more wind during the night and in winter when solar energy production is low.
Linking different geographical regions through longdistance transmission lines allows for further cancelling out of variability.
Energy demand can be shifted in time through energy demand management and the use of smart grids, matching the times when variable energy production is highest.
Further flexibility could be provided from sector coupling, that is coupling the electricity sector to the heat and mobility sector via powertoheatsystems and electric vehicles.Building overcapacity for wind and solar generation can help ensure that enough electricity is produced even during poor weather.
In optimal weather, energy generation may have to be curtailed if excess electricity cannot be used or stored.
Energy storage helps overcome barriers to intermittent renewable energy.
The most commonly used and available storage method is pumpedstorage hydroelectricity, which requires locations with large differences in height and access to water.
Batteries, especially lithiumion batteries, are also deployed widely.
Batteries typically store electricity for short periods.
The cost and low energy density of batteries makes them impractical for the large energy storage needed to balance interseasonal variations in energy production.
Pumped hydro storage with capacity for multimonth usage has been implemented in some locations.
<Nuclear power>
Nuclear power could complement renewables for electricity.
On the other hand, environmental and security risks could outweigh the benefits.The construction of new nuclear reactors currently takes about 10 years, substantially longer than scaling up the deployment of wind and solar, 335  and there are credit risks.
However they are thought to be much cheaper in China, and the country is building a significant number of new power plants.
As of 2019 the cost of extending nuclear power plant lifetimes is competitive with other electricity generation technologies, including new solar and wind projects.
<Replacing coal by natural gas>
<Mitigation by sector>
<Buildings>
The buildings sector accounts for 23 of global energyrelated CO2 emissions.
141  About half of the energy is used for space and water heating.
Building insulation can reduce the primary energy demand significantly.
Heat pump loads may also provide a flexible resource that can participate in demand response to integrate variable renewable resources into the grid.
Solar water heating uses the thermal energy directly.
Sufficiency measures include moving to smaller houses when the needs of households change, mixed use of spaces and the collective use of devices.
71  New buildings can be constructed using passive solar building design, lowenergy building, or zeroenergy building techniques.
In addition, it is possible to design buildings that are more energyefficient to cool by using lightercoloured, more reflective materials in the development of urban areas.
Heat pumps efficiently heat buildings, and cool them by air conditioning.
A modern heat pump typically transports around three to five times more thermal energy than electrical energy consumed, depending on the coefficient of performance and the outside temperature.Refrigeration and air conditioning account for about 10 of global CO2 emissions caused by fossil fuelbased energy production and the use of fluorinated gases.
Alternative cooling systems, such as passive cooling building design and installing passive daytime radiative cooling surfaces, can reduce air conditioning use.
Suburbs and cities in hot and arid climates can significantly reduce energy consumption from cooling with daytime radiative cooling.The energy consumption for cooling is expected to rise significantly due to increasing heat and availability of devices in poorer countries.
Of the 2.8 billion people living in the hottest parts of the world, only 8 currently have air conditioners, compared with 90 of people in the US and Japan.
By combining energy efficiency improvements with the transition away from superpolluting refrigerants, the world could avoid cumulative greenhouse gas emissions of up to 210 to 460 GtCO2e over the next four decades.
A shift to renewable energy in the cooling sector comes with two advantages Solar energy production with midday peaks corresponds with the load required for cooling.
Additionally, cooling has a large potential for load management in the electric grid.
<Transport>
Transportation emissions account for 15 of emissions worldwide.
Increasing the use of public transport, lowcarbon freight transport and cycling are important components of transport decarbonization.Electric vehicles and environmentally friendly rail help to reduce the consumption of fossil fuels.
In most cases, electric trains are more efficient than air transport and truck transport.
Other efficiency means include improved public transport, smart mobility, carsharing and electric hybrids.
Fossilfuel for passenger cars can be included in emissions trading.
Furthermore, moving away from a cardominated transport system towards lowcarbon advanced public transport system is important.
Heavyweight, large personal vehicles  require a lot of energy to move and take up much urban space.
Several alternatives modes of transport are available to replace these.
The European Union has made smart mobility part of its European Green Deal and in smart cities, smart mobility is also important.
The World Bank is supporting lower income countries to buy electric buses, as although their purchase price is higher than diesel buses this can be offset through lower running costs, and health improvements due to cleaner air in cities.Between a quarter and threequarters of cars on the road by 2050 are forecast to be electric vehicles.
Hydrogen may be a solution for longdistance heavy freight trucks, if batteries alone are too heavy.
<Shipping>
In the shipping industry, the use of liquefied natural gas  as a marine bunker fuel is driven by emissions regulations.
Ship operators have to switch from heavy fuel oil to more expensive oilbased fuels, implement costly flue gas treatment technologies or switch to LNG engines.
Methane slip, when gas leaks unburned through the engine, lowers the advantages of LNG.
Maersk, the largest container shipping line and vessel operator in the world, warns of stranded assets when investing into transitional fuels like LNG.
The company lists green ammonia as one of the preferred fuel types of the future and has announced the first carbonneutral vessel on the water by 2023, running on carbonneutral methanol.  Partially hydrogenpowered ships are being trialled for cruises.Hybrid and all electric ferries are suitable for short distances.
Norways goal is an all electric fleet by 2025.
<Air transport>
Jet airliners contribute to climate change by emitting carbon dioxide , the best understood greenhouse gas, and, with less scientific understanding, nitrogen oxides, contrails and particulates.
Their radiative forcing is estimated at 1.3 to 1.4 that of CO2 alone, excluding induced cirrus cloud with a very low level of scientific understanding.
In 2018, global commercial operations generated 2.4 of all CO2 emissions.While the aviation industry has become more fuel efficient, overall emissions have risen as the volume of air travel has increased.
By 2020, aviation emissions were 70 higher than in 2005 and they could grow by 300 by 2050.Aviations environmental footprint can be reduced by better fuel economy in aircraft, and by optimising flight routes to lower nonCO2 effects on climate from NOx, particulates or contrails.
Aviation biofuel, emissions trading and carbon offsetting, part of the 191 nation ICAOs Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation , can lower CO2 emissions.
Aviation usage can be lowered by shorthaul flight bans, train connections, personal choices and taxation on flights.
Fuelpowered aircraft may be replaced by hybrid electric aircraft and electric aircraft or by hydrogenpowered aircraft.
In aviation, current 180 Mt of CO2 emissions  are expected to rise in most projections, at least until 2040.
Aviation biofuel and hydrogen can only cover a small proportion of flights in the coming years.
The market entry for hybriddriven aircraft on regional scheduled flights is projected after 2030, for batterypowered aircraft after 2035.
Under CORSIA flight operators can purchase carbon offsets to cover their emissions above 2019 levels, CORSIA will be compulsory from 2027.
<Agriculture, forestry and land use>
Almost 20 of greenhouse gas emissions come from the agriculture and forestry sector.
Mitigation measures in the food system can be divided into four categories demandside changes, ecosystem protections, mitigation on farms, and mitigation in the supply chains.
On the demand side, limiting food waste is an effective way to reduce food emissions.
Furthermore, changes to a diet less reliant on animal products , are effective.
XXV With 21 of global methane emissions, cattle are a major driver of global warming.
6  When rainforests are cut and the land is converted for grazing, the impact is even higher.
This results in up to 335 kg CO2eq emissions to produce 1 kg beef in Brazil, when using a 30year time horizon.
Other livestock, manure management and rice cultivation also emit greenhouse gases, in addition to fossil fuel combustion in agriculture.
Important mitigation options for reducing the greenhouse gas emissions from livestock include genetic selection, introduction of methanotrophic bacteria into the rumen, vaccines, feeds, toilettraining, diet modification and grazing management.
Other options include just using ruminantfree alternatives instead, such as milk substitutes and meat analogues.
Nonruminant livestock, such as poultry, emits far less.Methane emissions in rice cultivation can be cut by implementing an improved water management, combining dry seeding and one drawdown, or a perfect execution of a sequence of wetting and drying.
This results in emission reductions of up to 90 compared to full flooding and even increased yields.
<Industry>
Industry is the largest emitter of greenhouse gases when direct and indirect emissions are included.
Emissions from industry can be reduced by electrification and green hydrogen can play a major role in energyintensive industries for which electricity is not an option.
Further mitigation options involve the steel and cement industry, which can switch to a less polluting production process.
Products can be made with less material to reduce emissionintensity and industrial processes can be made more efficient.
Finally, circular economy measures reduce the need for new materials, which also saves on emissions that would have been released from the mining of collecting of those materials.
43 The decarbonisation of cement production requires new technologies to be developed, and therefore investment in innovation.
Bioconcrete is one possibility to reduce emissions, but because no technology for mitigation is mature yet CCS will be needed at least in the shortterm.
Blast furnaces could be replaced by hydrogen direct reduced iron and electric arc furnaces.Coal, gas and oil production often comes with significant methane leakage.
In the early 2020s some governments recognized the scale of the problem and introduced regulations.
Methane leaks at oil and gas wells and processing plants are costeffective to fix in countries which can easily trade gas internationally.
There are leaks in countries where gas is cheap such as Iran, Russia, and Turkmenistan.
Nearly all this can be stopped by replacing old components and preventing routine flaring.
Coalbed methane may continue leaking even after the mine has been closed, but it can be captured by drainage andor ventilation systems.
Fossil fuel firms do not always have financial incentives to tackle methane leakage.
<Preserving and enhancing carbon sinks>
To reduce pressures on ecosystems and enhance their carbon sequestration capabilities, changes are necessary in agriculture and forestry, such as preventing deforestation and restoring natural ecosystems by reforestation.
266  Scenarios that limit global warming to 1.5 °C typically project the largescale use of carbon dioxide removal methods over the 21st century.
1068  17  There are concerns though about overreliance on these technologies, and environmental impacts.
17  34  Nonetheless, the mitigation potential of ecosystem restoration and reduced conversion are among the mitigation tools that can yield the most emissions reductions before 2030.
43 Landbased mitigation options are referred to as AFOLU mitigation options in the 2022 IPCC report on mitigation.
The abbreviation stands for agriculture, forestry and other land use 37  The report described the economic mitigation potential from relevant activities around forests and ecosystems as follows the conservation, improved management, and restoration of forests and other ecosystems .
A high mitigation potential is found for reducing deforestation in tropical regions.
The economic potential of these activities has been estimated to be 4.2 to 7.4 Giga tons of CO2 equivalents per year.
<Forests>
The UK governments Stern Review on the economics of climate change stated already in 2007 that curbing deforestation was a highly costeffective way of reducing greenhouse gas emissions.Mitigation measures in the area of forestry are slow and often have tradeoffs with food prices and potential confounding spillover effects on climate from indirect land use change.
<Conservation>
About 95 of deforestation occurs in the tropics, where it is mostly driven by the clearing of land for agriculture.
One forest conservation strategy is transferring rights over land from public domain to its indigenous inhabitants.  Concessions to land often go to powerful extractive companies and conservation strategies that exclude and even evict humans, called fortress conservation, often lead to more exploitation of the land as the native inhabitants then turn to work for extractive companies to survive.
<Afforestation and reforestation>
Afforestation is the establishment of trees where there was previously no tree cover.
Scenarios for new plantations covering up to 4000 Mha  calculate with a cumulative carbon storage of more than 900 GtC  until 2100.
However, these are not considered a viable alternative to aggressive emissions reduction, as the plantations would need to be so large, they would eliminate most natural ecosystems or reduce food production.
One example is the Trillion Tree Campaign.
Reforestation is the restocking of existing depleted forests or where there was once recently forests.
Reforestation could save at least 1 GtCO2year, at an estimated cost of 5 to 15tCO2.
Restoring all degraded forests all over the world could capture about 205 GtC .
With increased intensive agriculture and urbanization, there is an increase in the amount of abandoned farmland.
By some estimates, for every acre of original oldgrowth forest cut down, more than 50 acres of new secondary forests are growing.
Promoting regrowth on abandoned farmland could offset years of carbon emissions.Planting new trees can be expensive and a risky investment as, for example, about 80 percent of planted trees in the Sahel die within two years.
Instead, helping native species sprout naturally is cheaper and they are more likely to survive, with even long deforested areas still containing an underground forest of living roots and tree stumps.
This could include pruning and coppicing to accelerate growth and this also provides woodfuel, which is otherwise a major source of deforestation.
Such practices, called farmermanaged natural regeneration, are centuries old but the biggest obstacle towards implementation is the ownership of the trees by the state, who often sell timber rights to businesses.
This leads to seedlings being uprooted by locals who saw them as a liability.
Legal aid for locals and changes to property law such as in Mali and Niger has led to what has been called the largest positive environmental transformation in Africa, with it being possible to discern from space the border between Niger and the more barren land in Nigeria, where the law has not changed.Proforestation is promoting forests to capture their full ecological potential.
This is a mitigation strategy as secondary forests that have regrown in abandoned farmland are found to have less biodiversity than the original oldgrowth forests and original forests store 60 more carbon than these new forests.
Strategies include rewilding and establishing wildlife corridors.
<Increasing soil carbon>
There are many measures to increase soil carbon, which makes it complex and hard to measure and account for an advantage is that there are fewer tradeoffs for these measures than for BECCS or afforestation, for example.Globally, protecting healthy soils and restoring the soil carbon sponge could remove 7.6 billion tons of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere annually, which is more than the annual emissions of the US.
Trees capture CO2 while growing above ground and exuding larger amounts of carbon below ground.
Trees contribute to the building of a soil carbon sponge.
The carbon formed above ground is released as CO2 immediately when wood is burned.
If dead wood remains untouched, only some of the carbon returns to the atmosphere as decomposition proceeds.Methods that enhance carbon sequestration in soil include notill farming, residue mulching and crop rotation, all of which are more widely used in organic farming than in conventional farming.
Because only 5 of US farmland currently uses notill and residue mulching, there is a large potential for carbon sequestration.Farming can deplete soil carbon and render soil incapable of supporting life.
However, conservation farming can protect carbon in soils, and repair damage over time.
The farming practice of cover crops has been recognized as climatesmart agriculture.
Best management practices for European soils were described to increase soil organic carbon conversion of arable land to grassland, straw incorporation, reduced tillage, straw incorporation combined with reduced tillage, ley cropping system and cover crops.Regenerative agriculture includes conservation tillage, diversity, rotation and cover crops, minimizing physical disturbance and supporting carbon sequestration in soils.
It has other benefits like improving the state of the soil and consequently yields.Another mitigation option is the production of biochar, the solid remaining after the pyrolysis of biomass, and its storage in soils.
Biochar production releases half of the carbon from the biomasseither released into the atmosphere or captured with CCSand retains most the other half in the stable biochar.
It can endure in soil for thousands of years.
Biochar may increase the soil fertility of acidic soils and increase agricultural productivity.
During production of biochar, heat is released which may be used as bioenergy.
<Wetland restoration>
Wetland restoration is an important mitigation measure which has moderate to big mitigation potential on a limited land area with low tradeoffs and costs.
Wetlands perform two important functions in relation to climate change.
They can sequester carbon, converting carbon dioxide to solid plant material through photosynthesis, but they also store and regulate water.
Wetlands store approximately 44.6 million tonnes of carbon per year globally.Some wetlands are a significant source of methane emissions and some also emit nitrous oxide.
Peatland globally covers just 3 of the lands surface but stores up to 550 gigatonnes of carbon, representing 42 of all soil carbon and exceeds the carbon stored in all other vegetation types, including the worlds forests.
The threat to peatlands include draining the areas for agriculture and cutting down trees for lumber as the trees help hold and fix the peatland.
Additionally, peat is often sold for compost.
Restoration of degraded peatlands can be done by blocking drainage channels in the peatland, and allowing natural vegetation to recover.Mangroves, salt marshes and seagrasses  make up the majority of the oceans vegetated habitats.
They only equal 0.05 of the plant biomass on land, but store carbon 40 times faster than tropical forests.
Bottom trawling, dredging for coastal development and fertilizer runoff have damaged coastal habitats.
Notably, 85 of oyster reefs globally have been removed in the last two centuries.
Oyster reefs clean the water and make other species thrive, thus increasing biomass in that area.
In addition, oyster reefs mitigate the effects of climate change by reducing the force of waves from hurricanes and reduce the erosion from rising sea levels.
Restoration of coastal wetlands is thought to be more costeffective than restoration of inland wetlands.
<Bioenergy with carbon capture and storage>
Bioenergy with carbon capture and storage  is the process of extracting bioenergy from biomass and capturing and storing the carbon, thereby removing it from the atmosphere.
The carbon in the biomass comes from the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide  which is extracted from the atmosphere by the biomass when it grows.
Energy is extracted in useful forms  as the biomass is utilized through combustion, fermentation, pyrolysis or other conversion methods.
Some of the carbon in the biomass is converted to CO2 or biochar which can then be stored by geologic sequestration or land application, respectively, enabling carbon dioxide removal  and making BECCS a negative emissions technology .The potential range of negative emissions from BECCS was estimated in 2018 as 0 to 22 giga tonnes per year.
As of 2022, approximately 2 million tonnes per year of CO2 was being captured annually.
Wide deployment of BECCS is constrained by cost and availability of biomass.
10 BECCS currently forms a big part of achieving climate targets beyond 2050 in modelling, such as by the Integrated Assessment Models  associated with the IPCC process, but many scientists are very skeptical due the risk of loss of biodiversity and increases in food prices.
<Oceanbased options>
In principle, carbon can be stored in ocean reservoirs.
This can be done with oceanbased mitigation systems including ocean fertilization, ocean alkalinity enhancement or enhanced weathering.
12 to 36  Blue carbon management is partly an oceanbased method and partly a landbased method.
12 to 37  Most of these options could also help to reduce ocean acidification, the drop in pH value caused by increased atmospheric CO2 concentrations.The current assessment of potential for oceanbased mitigation options is in 2022 that they have only limited current deployment, but moderate to large future mitigation potentials in future.
12 to 4 In total, oceanbased methods have a combined potential to remove 1 to 100 gigatons of CO2 per year.
TS94  Their costs are in the order of USD40 to 500 per ton of CO2.
For example, enhanced weathering could remove 2 to 4 gigatons of CO2 per year.
This technology comes with a cost of 50200 USD per ton of CO2.
TS94  Enhanced weathering is a process that aims to accelerate the natural weathering by spreading finely ground silicate rock, such as basalt, onto surfaces which speeds up chemical reactions between rocks, water, and air.
It removes removes carbon dioxide  from the atmosphere, permanently storing it in solid carbonate minerals or ocean alkalinity.
<Blue carbon management>
<Technologies to capture carbon dioxide>
Direct air capture is a process of capturing CO2 directly from the ambient air  and generating a concentrated stream of CO2 for sequestration or utilization or production of carbonneutral fuel and windgas.
Artificial processes vary, and concerns have been expressed about the longterm effects of some of these processes.
Carbon capture and storage  is a method to mitigate climate change by capturing carbon dioxide  from large point sources, such as cement factories or biomass power plants, and subsequently storing it away safely instead of releasing it into the atmosphere.
The IPCC estimates that the costs of halting global warming would double without CCS.
Norways Sleipner gas field, beginning in 1996, stores almost a million tons of CO2 a year to avoid penalties in producing natural gas with unusually high levels of CO2.
<Demand reduction>
Demand of products and services which cause greenhouse gas emissions can be reduced in three different ways.
Firstly, demand can be reduced by behavioural and cultural changes, for instance changes in diet.
Secondly, demand for energy and other emitting services can be reduced by improved infrastructure, such as a good public transport network.
Lastly, changes in enduse technology can reduce energy demand .
119 Mitigation options that reduce demand for products or services are helping people make personal choices to reduce their carbon footprint, for example in their choice of transport options or their diets.
5 to 3  This means there are many social aspects with the demandside mitigation actions.
For example, people with high socioeconomic status often contribute more to greenhouse gas emissions than those from a lower socioeconomic status.
By reducing their emissions and promoting green policies, these people could become role models of lowcarbon lifestyles.
5 to 4  However, there are many psychological variables that influence motivation of people to reduce their demand such as awareness and perceived risk.
Government policies can support or hinder demandsite mitigation options.
For example, public policy can promote circular economy concepts which would support climate change mitigation.
5 to 6  Reducing greenhouse gas emissions is linked to sharing economy and circular economy.
<Energy conservation and efficiency>
Global primary energy demand exceeded 161,000 TWh in 2018.
This refers to electricity, transport and heating including all losses.
In transport and electricity production, fossil fuel usage has a low efficiency of less than 50.
Large amounts of heat in power plants and in motors of vehicles are wasted.
The actual amount of energy consumed is significantly lower at 116,000 TWh.Energy conservation is the effort made to reduce the consumption of energy by using less of an energy service.
This can be achieved either by using energy more efficiently  or by reducing the amount of service used .
Energy conservation is at the top of the sustainable energy hierarchy.
Energy can be conserved by reducing wastage and losses, improving efficiency through technological upgrades, and improved operations and maintenance.
Efficient energy use, sometimes simply called energy efficiency, is the process of reducing the amount of energy required to provide products and services.
Improved energy efficiency in buildings , industrial processes and transportation could reduce the worlds energy needs in 2050 by one third, and thus help reduce global emissions of greenhouse gases.
For example, insulating a building allows it to use less heating and cooling energy to achieve and maintain thermal comfort.
Improvements in energy efficiency are generally achieved by adopting a more efficient technology or production process or by application of commonly accepted methods to reduce energy losses.
<Lifestyle changes>
Individual action on climate change can include personal choices in many areas, such as diet, travel, household energy use, consumption of goods and services, and family size.
People who wish to reduce their carbon footprint , can take highimpact actions, such as avoiding frequent flying and petrol fuelled cars, eating mainly a plantbased diet, having fewer children, using clothes and electrical products for longer, and electrifying homes.
Excessive consumption is more to blame for climate change than population increase.
High consumption lifestyles have a greater environmental impact, with the richest 10 of people emitting about half the total lifestyle emissions.
<Dietary change>
Avoiding meat and dairy foods has been called the single biggest way an individual can reduce their environmental impact.
The widespread adoption of a vegetarian diet could cut foodrelated greenhouse gas emissions by 63 by 2050.
China introduced new dietary guidelines in 2016 which aim to cut meat consumption by 50 and thereby reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 1 billion tonnes by 2030.
Overall, food accounts for the largest share of consumptionbased greenhouse gas emissions with nearly 20 of the global carbon footprint.
Almost 15 of all anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions has been attributed to the livestock sector.A shift towards plantbased diets would help to mitigate climate change.
In particular, reducing meat consumption would help to reduce methane emissions.
If highincome nations switched to a plantbased diet, vast amounts of land used for animal agriculture could be allowed to return to their natural state, which in turn has the potential to sequester 100 billion tons of CO2 by the end of the century.
<Family size>
Population growth has resulted in higher greenhouse gas emissions in most regions, particularly Africa.
6 to 11  However, economic growth has a bigger effect than population growth.
6 to 11 It is the rising incomes, changes in consumption and dietary patterns, together with population growth, which causes pressure on land and other natural resources, and leads to more greenhouse gas emissions and less carbon sinks.
117  Scholars have pointed out that In concert with policies that end fossil fuel use and incentivize sustainable consumption, humane policies that slow population growth should be part of a multifaceted climate response.
It is known that advances in female education and reproductive health, especially voluntary family planning, can contribute greatly to reducing world population growth.
5 to 35 
<Investment and finance>
<Investment>
More than 1000 organizations with a worth of US8 trillion have made commitments to fossil fuel divestment.
Socially responsible investing funds allow investors to invest in funds that meet high environmental, social and corporate governance  standards.There are lists to show the business organisations which are the top contributors to greenhouse gas emissions.
Asset management firms are often identified as controllers of large amounts of contemporary financial value with insufficient dedication to climate change targets, with the largest four asset managers controlling around 20 of the worlds listed market values  an aggregate assets under management of 20 trillion as of 2021.
<Funding>
In order to reconcile economic development with mitigating carbon emissions, developing countries need particular support, both financial and technical.
Accelerated support would also address inequities in finance and economic vulnerability to climate change.
One of the means of achieving this is the Kyoto Protocols Clean Development Mechanism .
The World Banks Prototype Carbon Fund is a public private partnership that operates within the CDM.
However, none of these initiatives suggest a quantitative cap on the emissions from developing countries.
This is considered as a particularly difficult policy proposal as the economic growth of developing countries are proportionally reflected in the growth of greenhouse emissions.
An important point of contention is how overseas development assistance not directly related to climate change mitigation is affected by funds provided to climate change mitigation.
One of the outcomes of the UNFCC Copenhagen Climate Conference was the Copenhagen Accord, in which developed countries promised to provide US30 million between 2010 and 2012 of new and additional resources.
Yet it remains unclear what exactly the definition of additional is.
<Carbon pricing>
Additional costs on greenhouse gas emissions can lower competitiveness of fossil fuels and accelerate investments into lowcarbon sources of energy.
A growing number of countries raise a fixed carbon tax or participate in dynamic carbon emission trading  systems.
In 2021, more than 21 of global greenhouse gas emissions were covered by a carbon price, a major increase due to the introduction of the Chinese national carbon trading scheme.
23 Trading schemes offer the possibility to limit emission allowances to certain reduction targets.
However, an oversupply of allowances keeps most ETS at low price levels around 10 with a low impact.
This includes the Chinese ETS which started with 7tCO2 in 2021.
One exception is the European Union Emission Trading Scheme where prices began to rise in 2018, reaching about 80tCO2 in 2022.
This results in additional costs of about 0.04KWh for coal and 0.02KWh for gas combustion for electricity, depending on the emission intensity.2021 models of the social cost of carbon calculated a damage of more than 3000 per ton CO2 as a result of economy feedbacks and falling global GDP growth rates, while policy recommendations for a carbon price ranged from about 50 to 200.
22 Industries which have high energy requirements and high emissions often pay only very low energy taxes, or even none at all.
11 to 80 Methane emissions from fossil fuel extraction are occasionally taxed, but methane and nitrous oxide from agriculture are typically left untaxed.
<Cost estimates>
Mitigation cost estimates depend on the baseline , the way costs are modelled, and assumptions about future government policy.
622  Cost estimates for mitigation for specific regions are dependent on the quantity of emissions allowed for that region in future, as well as the timing of interventions.
90 Mitigation costs will vary according to how and when emissions are cut early, wellplanned action will minimise the costs.
Globally, the benefits of keeping warming under 2 °C exceed the costs.Many economists estimate the cost of climate change mitigation at between 1 and 2 of GDP.
One 2018 estimate stated that temperature increase can be limited to 1.5 °C for 1.7 trillion dollars a year.
According to this study, a global investment of approximately 1.7 trillion per year would have been needed to keep global warming below 1.5°C.
Whereas this is a large sum, it is still far less than the subsidies governments provided to the ailing fossil fuel industry, estimated at more than 5 trillion per year by the International Monetary Fund.
However by the end of 2022 many thought limiting to 1.5 °C politically impossible.The economic repercussions of mitigation vary widely across regions and households, depending on policy design and level of international cooperation.
Delayed global cooperation increases policy costs across regions, especially in those that are relatively carbon intensive at present.
Pathways with uniform carbon values show higher mitigation costs in more carbonintensive regions, in fossilfuels exporting regions and in poorer regions.
Aggregate quantifications expressed in GDP or monetary terms undervalue the economic effects on households in poorer countries the actual effects on welfare and wellbeing are comparatively larger.Costbenefit analysis may be unsuitable for analysing climate change mitigation as a whole but still useful for analysing the difference between a 1.5 °C target and 2 °C.
One way of estimating the cost of reducing emissions is by considering the likely costs of potential technological and output changes.
Policy makers can compare the marginal abatement costs of different methods to assess the cost and amount of possible abatement over time.
The marginal abatement costs of the various measures will differ by country, by sector, and over time.
<Distributing emissions abatement costs>
Mitigation at the speed and scale required to likely limit warming to 2 °C or below implies deep economic and structural changes, thereby raising multiple types of distributional concerns across regions, income classes and sectors.There have been different proposals on how to allocate responsibility for cutting emissions 103  Egalitarianism, basic needs , proportionality and polluterpays principle.
A specific proposal is the equal per capita entitlements.
106  This approach can be divided into two categories.
In the first category, emissions are allocated according to national population.
In the second category, emissions are allocated in a way that attempts to account for historical  emissions.
<Avoided costs of climate change effects>
By limiting climate change, some of the costs of the effects of climate change can be avoided.
According to the Stern Review, inaction can be as high as the equivalent of losing at least 5 of global gross domestic product  each year, now and forever , whereas mitigating climate change will only cost about 2 of the GDP.
Also, delaying to take significant reductions in greenhouse gas emissions may not be a good idea, when seen from a financial perspective.Mitigation solutions are often evaluated in terms of costs and greenhouse gas reduction potentials, missing out on the consideration of direct effects on human wellbeing.
<Policies and actors>
<Municipal policies and urban planning>
Cities have big potential for reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
They emitted 28 GtCO2eq in 2020 of combined CO2 and CH4 emissions.
TS61  This was through the production and consumption of goods and services.
TS61  Climatesmart urban planning aims to reduce sprawl to reduce the distance travelled, thus lowering emissions from transportation.
It supports mixed use of space, transit, walking, cycling, sharing vehicles can reduce urban emissions.
Urban forestry, lakes and other blue and green infrastructure can reduce emissions directly and indirectly by reduced energy demand for cooling.
TS66  Personal cars are extremely inefficient at moving passengers, while public transport and bicycles are many times more efficient in an urban context.
Switching from cars by improving walkability and cycling infrastructure is either free or beneficial to a countrys economy as a whole.
Methane emissions from municipal solid waste can be reduced by segregation, composting, and recycling.
<National policies>
Climate change mitigation policies can have a large and complex impact, both positive and negative, on the socioeconomic status of individuals and countries.
Without welldesigned and inclusive policies, climate change mitigation measures can place a higher financial burden on poor households.The most effective and economically efficient approach of achieving lower emissions in the energy sector is to apply a combination of marketbased instruments , standards, and information policies.
422 Many countries are aiming for net zero emissions, and many have either carbon taxes or carbon emission trading.
As of 2021, three countries are carbon negative, meaning they remove from the atmosphere more greenhouse gas emissions then they emit.
These countries Bhutan, Suriname and Panama formed a small coalition at the 2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference and asked for help so that other countries will join it.Types of national policies that would support climate change mitigation include
Regulatory standards These set technology or performance standards, and can be effective in addressing the market failure of informational barriers.
412  If the costs of regulation are less than the benefits of addressing the market failure, standards can result in net benefits.
One example are fuelefficiency standards for cars.
Marketbased instruments such as emission taxes and charges an emissions tax requires domestic emitters to pay a fixed fee or tax for every tonne of CO2eq GHG emissions released into the atmosphere.
4123  If every emitter were to face the same level of tax, the lowest cost way of achieving emission reductions in the economy would be undertaken first.
In the real world, however, markets are not perfect, meaning that an emissions tax may deviate from this ideal.
Distributional and equity considerations usually result in differential tax rates for different sources.
Tradable permits Emissions can be limited with a permit system.
415  A number of permits are distributed equal to the emission limit, with each liable entity required to hold the number of permits equal to its actual emissions.
A tradable permit system can be costeffective so long as transaction costs are not excessive, and there are no significant imperfections in the permit market and markets relating to emitting activities.
Voluntary agreements These are agreements between government  and industry.
417  Agreements may relate to general issues, such as research and development, but in other cases, quantitative targets may be agreed upon.
There is, however, the risk that participants in the agreement will free ride, either by not complying with the agreement or by benefitting from the agreement while bearing no cost.
Informational instruments Poor information is recognized as a barrier to improved energy efficiency or reduced emissions.
419  Examples of policies in this area include increasing public awareness of energy saving with home heating and insulation or emissions from meat and dairy products.
However some say that for a politician asking people to eat less meat is politically toxic.
Research and development policies Some areas, such as soil, may differ by country and so need national research.
Technologies may need financial support to reach commercial scale, for example floating wind power.
Low carbon power Governments may relax planning regulations on solar power and onshore wind, and may partly finance technologies considered risky by the private sector, such as nuclear.
Demandside management This aims to reduce energy demand, e.g., through energy audits, labelling, and regulation.
Adding or removing subsidies
A subsidy for greenhouse gas emissions reductions pays entities a specific amount per tonne of CO2eq for every tonne of greenhouse gas reduced or sequestered.
421  Although subsidies are generally less efficient than taxes, distributional and competitiveness issues sometimes result in energyemission taxes being coupled with subsidies or tax exceptions.
Creating subsidies and financial incentives for example energy subsidies to support clean generation which is not yet commercially viable such as tidal power.
Phasingout of unhelpful subsidies Many countries provide subsidies for activities that impact emissions, e.g., subsidies in the agriculture and energy sectors, and indirect subsidies for transport.
Specific example agricultural subsidies for cattle or fossil fuel subsidies
A Green Marshall Plan, which  calls for global central bank money creation to fund green infrastructure,
Market liberalization Restructuring of energy markets has occurred in several countries and regions.
These policies have mainly been designed to increase competition in the market, but they can have a significant impact on emissions.
409 to 410 
<Phasing out fossil fuel subsidies>
<International agreements>
Almost all countries are parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change .
The ultimate objective of the UNFCCC is to stabilize atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases at a level that would prevent dangerous human interference with the climate system.
<Paris Agreement>
The Paris Agreement has become the main current international agreement on combating climate change.
Each country must determine, plan, and regularly report on the contribution that it undertakes to mitigate global warming.
Climate change mitigation measures can be written down in national environmental policy documents like the nationally determined contributions .
The Paris agreement succeeds the 1997 Kyoto Protocol which expired in 2020.
Countries that ratified the Kyoto protocol committed to reduce their emissions of carbon dioxide and five other greenhouse gases, or engage in emissions trading if they maintain or increase emissions of these gases.
In 2015, two official UNFCCC scientific expert bodies came to the conclusion that, in some regions and vulnerable ecosystems, high risks are projected even for warming above 1.5 °C.
This expert position was, together with the strong diplomatic voice of the poorest countries and the island nations in the Pacific, the driving force leading to the decision of the Paris Conference 2015, to lay down this 1.5 °C longterm target on top of the existing 2 °C goal.
<Additional commitments>
In addition to the main agreements, there are many additional pledges made by international coalitions, countries, cities, regions and businesses.
According to a report published in September 2019 before the 2019 UN Climate Action Summit, full implementation of all pledges, including those in the Paris Agreement, will be sufficient to limit temperature rise to 2 degrees but not to 1.5 degrees.
After the report was published, additional pledges were made in the September climate summit and in December of that year.In December 2020 another climate action summit was held and important commitments were made.
The organizers stated that, including the commitments expected in the beginning of the following year, countries representing 70 of the global economy will be committed to reach zero emissions by 2050.In September 2021 the US and EU launched the Global Methane Pledge to cut methane emissions by 30 by 2030.
UK, Argentina, Indonesia, Italy and Mexico joined the initiative, while Ghana and Iraq signaled interest in joining, according to a White House summary of the meeting, which noted those countries represent six of the top 15 methane emitters globally.
Israel also joined the initiativeAlthough not designed for this purpose, the Montreal Protocol has benefited climate change mitigation efforts.
The Montreal Protocol is an international treaty that has successfully reduced emissions of ozonedepleting substances , which are also greenhouse gases.
<History>
Historically climate change has been approached at a multinational level where a consensus decision is reached at the United Nations , under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change .
This represents the dominant approach historically of engaging as many international governments as possible in taking action in on a worldwide public issue.
There is a precedent that this model can work, as seen in the Montreal Protocol in 1987.
The topdown framework of only utilizing the UNFCCC consensus approach has been proposed to be ineffective, with counter proposals of bottom up governance and decreasing the emphasis of the UNFCCC.The Kyoto Protocol to the UNFCCC  set out legally binding emission reduction commitments for the Annex B countries.
817   The Protocol defined three international policy instruments  which could be used by the Annex B countries to meet their emission reduction commitments.
According to Bashmakov, use of these instruments could significantly reduce the costs for Annex B countries in meeting their emission reduction commitments.
402 The European Unions mitigation target for 2020 was Reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 20 from the level in 1990, produce 20 of energy from renewable sources, increase Energy Efficiency by 20.
The European Union claims that they have already achieved the 2020 target for emission reduction and have the legislation needed to achieve the 2030 targets.
Already in 2018, its greenhouse gas emissions were 23 lower than those in 1990.
<Society and culture>
<Barriers>
Barriers to achieving climate change mitigation can be grouped into individual, institutional and market barriers.
5 to 71  They differ for all the different mitigation options, regions and societies.
Complicated issues around accounting of carbon dioxide removal can act as economic barriers, for example with regards to BECCS .
6 to 42  The strategies that companies follow can act as a barrier but also as an accelerator of decarbonisation.
5 to 84 In order to decarbonise societies the state  needs to play a predominant role because this requires a massive coordination effort.
213  This strong government role, however, can only work well if there is social cohesion, political stability and trust.
213 For landbased mitigation options, finance is a major barrier, followed by cultural values, governance, accountability and institutional capacity as other barriers.
7 to 5 For developing countries, additional barriers to mitigation include
The cost of capital increased in the early 2020s.
A lack of available capital and finance is common in developing countries.
Together with the absence of regulatory standards, this barrier supports the proliferation of inefficient equipment.
There are also financial and capacity barrier in many of these countries.
97 It has been estimated that only 0.12 of all funding for climaterelated research is spent on the social science of climate change mitigation.
Vastly more funding is spent on natural science studies of climate change and considerable sums are also spent on studies of impact of and adaptation to climate change.
<Risks>
Mitigation measures can also have negative side effects and risks.
TS133  In agriculture and forestry, mitigation measures can affect biodiversity and ecosystem functioning.
TS87  In the area of renewable energy, mining for metals and minerals can increase mining threats to conservation areas.
To address one of these issues, there is research into ways to recycle solar panels and electronic waste in order to create a source for materials that would otherwise need to be mined.Discussions about risks and negative side effects of mitigation measures can lead to deadlock or a sense that there are intractable obstacles to taking action.
<Impacts of the COVID19 pandemic>
The COVID19 pandemic led some governments to shift their focus away from climate action, at least temporarily.
The hindrance of environmental policy efforts, combined with economic slowdown may have contributed to slowed investment in green energy technologies.In 2020, carbon dioxide emissions fell by 6.4 or 2.3 billion tonnes globally.
Greenhouse gas emissions rebounded later in the pandemic as many countries began lifting restrictions, with the direct impact of pandemic policies having a negligible longterm impact on climate change.
<Examples by country>
<United States>
<China>
In 2020, China committed to peak emissions by 2030 and reach net zero by 2060 following the 2021 blackouts, officials indicated the 2030 target was something to strive to and not necessarily to be met.  In order to limit warming to 1.5 °C coal plants in China without carbon capture must be phased out by 2045.
The Chinese national carbon trading scheme started in 2021.
<European Union>
The climate commitments of the European Union were divided into three main categories targets for the year 2020 , for 2030 and for 2050.
The European Union state that their policies are in line with the goal of the Paris Agreement.
Targets for 2030 Reduce greenhouse gas emission by 40 from the level of 1990.
In 2019 The European Parliament adopted a resolution upgrading the target to 55, produce 32 of energy from renewables, increase energy efficiency by 32.5.
Target for 2050 become climate neutral.

<effect of climate changes on ecosystem>
Climate change has adversely affected terrestrial and marine ecosystems, including tundras, mangroves, coral reefs, and caves.
Increasing global temperature, more frequent occurrence of extreme weather, and rising sea level are examples of the most impactful effects of climate change.
Possible consequences of these effects include species decline and extinction, change within ecosystems, increased prevalence of invasive species, forests converting from carbon sinks to carbon sources, ocean acidification, disruption of the water cycle, and increased occurrence of natural disasters.
<General>
Climate change is affecting terrestrial ecoregions.
Increasing global temperature means that ecosystems are changing some species are being forced out of their habitats  because of changing conditions.
An example is migration.
Due to the ever hotter weather, birds are forced to move to foreign lands.
Other effects of global warming include less snow fall, rising sea levels, Ozone depleting and weather changes.
These may influence human activities and the ecosystem.Within the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report, experts assessed the literature on the impacts of climate change on ecosystems.
Rosenzweig et al.  concluded that over the last three decades, humaninduced warming had likely had a discernible influence on many physical and biological systems .
Schneider et al.  concluded, with very high confidence, that regional temperature trends had already affected species and ecosystems around the world .
They also concluded that climate change would result in the extinction of many species and a reduction in the diversity of different types of ecosystems .
Terrestrial ecosystems and biodiversity With a warming of 45 °C, relative to 2010 levels, it is likely that global terrestrial vegetation would become a net source of carbon .
With high confidence, Schneider et al.  concluded that a global mean temperature increase of around 4 °C  by 2100 would lead to major extinctions around the world.
Marine ecosystems and biodiversity With high confidence, scientists concluded that a warming of 23 °C above 2010 levels would result in mass mortality of coral reefs globally.
In addition, several studies dealing with planktonic organisms and modelling have shown that temperature plays a transcendental role in marine microbial food webs, which may have a deep influence on the biological carbon pump of marine planktonic pelagic and mesopelagic ecosystems.
Freshwater ecosystems Above about a 4 °C increase in global mean temperature by 2100 , scientists concluded, with high confidence, that many freshwater species would become extinct or largely endangered.
<Biodiversity>
<Extinction>
Studying the association between Earth climate and extinctions over the past 520 million years, scientists from the University of York write, The global temperatures predicted for the coming centuries may trigger a new mass extinction event, where over 50 percent of animal and plant species would be wiped out.Many of the species at risk are Arctic and Antarctic fauna such as polar bears and emperor penguins.
In the Arctic, the waters of Hudson Bay are icefree for three weeks longer than they were thirty years ago, affecting polar bears, which prefer to hunt on sea ice.
Species that rely on cold weather conditions such as gyrfalcons, and snowy owls that prey on lemmings that use the cold winter to their advantage may be negatively affected.
Marine invertebrates achieve peak growth at the temperatures they have adapted to, and coldblooded animals found at high latitudes and altitudes generally grow faster to compensate for the short growing season.
Warmerthanideal conditions result in higher metabolism and consequent reductions in body size despite increased foraging, which in turn elevates the risk of predation.
Indeed, even a slight increase in temperature during development impairs growth efficiency and survival rate in rainbow trout.Mechanistic studies have documented extinctions due to recent climate change McLaughlin et al.
documented two populations of Bay checkerspot butterfly being threatened by precipitation change.
Parmesan states, Few studies have been conducted at a scale that encompasses an entire species and McLaughlin et al.
agreed few mechanistic studies have linked extinctions to recent climate change.
Daniel Botkin and other authors in one study believe that projected rates of extinction are overestimated.  For recent extinctions, see Holocene extinction.
Many species of freshwater and saltwater plants and animals are dependent on glacierfed waters to ensure a cold water habitat that they have adapted to.
Some species of freshwater fish need cold water to survive and to reproduce, and this is especially true with salmon and cutthroat trout.
Reduced glacier runoff can lead to insufficient stream flow to allow these species to thrive.
Ocean krill, a cornerstone species, prefer cold water and are the primary food source for aquatic mammals such as the blue whale.
Alterations to the ocean currents, due to increased freshwater inputs from glacier melt, and the potential alterations to thermohaline circulation of the worlds oceans, may affect existing fisheries upon which humans depend as well.
The white lemuroid possum, only found in the Daintree mountain forests of northern Queensland, may be the first mammal species to be driven extinct by global warming in Australia.
In 2008, the white possum has not been seen in over three years.
The possums cannot survive extended temperatures over 30 °C , which occurred in 2005.A 27year study of the largest colony of Magellanic penguins in the world, published in 2014, found that extreme weather caused by climate change is responsible for killing 7 of penguin chicks per year on average, and in some years studied climate change accounted for up to 50 of all chick deaths.
Since 1987, the number of breeding pairs in the colony has reduced by 24.Furthermore, climate change may disrupt ecological partnerships among interacting species, via changes on behaviour and phenology, or via climate niche mismatch.
The disruption of speciesspecies associations is a potential consequence of climatedriven movements of each individual species towards opposite directions.
Climate change may, thus, lead to another extinction, more silent and mostly overlooked the extinction of species interactions.
As a consequence of the spatial decoupling of speciesspecies associations, ecosystem services derived from biotic interactions are also at risk from climate niche mismatch.
<Behaviour change>
Rising temperatures are beginning to have a noticeable impact on birds, and butterflies nearly 160 species from 10 different zones have shifted their ranges northward by 200 km in Europe and North America.
The migration range of larger animals may be constrained by human development.
In Britain, spring butterflies are appearing an average of 6 days earlier than two decades ago.A 2002 article in Nature surveyed the scientific literature to find recent changes in range or seasonal behaviour by plant and animal species.
Of species showing recent change, 4 out of 5 shifted their ranges towards the poles or higher altitudes, creating refugee species.
Frogs were breeding, flowers blossoming and birds migrating an average 2.3 days earlier each decade butterflies, birds and plants moving towards the poles by 6.1 km per decade.
A 2005 study concludes human activity is the cause of the temperature rise and resultant changing species behaviour, and links these effects with the predictions of climate models to provide validation for them.
Scientists have observed that Antarctic hair grass is colonizing areas of Antarctica where previously their survival range was limited.Climate change is leading to a mismatch between the snow camouflage of arctic animals such as snowshoe hares with the increasingly snowfree landscape.
<Invasive species>
<Forests and climate change>
As the northern forests are a carbon sink, while dead forests are a major carbon source, the loss of such large areas of forest has a positive feedback on global warming.
In the worst years, the carbon emission due to beetle infestation of forests in British Columbia alone approaches that of an average year of forest fires in all of Canada or five years worth of emissions from that countrys transportation sources.Research suggests that slowgrowing trees only are stimulated in growth for a short period under higher CO2 levels, while faster growing plants like liana benefit in the long term.
In general, but especially in rainforests, this means that liana become the prevalent species and because they decompose much faster than trees their carbon content is more quickly returned to the atmosphere.
Slow growing trees incorporate atmospheric carbon for decades.
<Wildfires>
Healthy and unhealthy forests appear to face an increased risk of forest fires because of the warming climate.
The 10year average of boreal forest burned in North America, after several decades of around 10,000 km2 , has increased steadily since 1970 to more than 28,000 km2  annually.
Though this change may be due in part to changes in forest management practices, in the western U.S., since 1986, longer, warmer summers have resulted in a fourfold increase of major wildfires and a sixfold increase in the area of forest burned, compared to the period from 1970 to 1986.
A similar increase in wildfire activity has been reported in Canada from 1920 to 1999.Forest fires in Indonesia have dramatically increased since 1997 as well.
These fires are often actively started to clear forest for agriculture.
They can set fire to the large peat bogs in the region and the CO₂released by these peat bog fires has been estimated, in an average year, to be 15 of the quantity of CO₂ produced by fossil fuel combustion.
A 2018 study found that trees grow faster due to increased carbon dioxide levels, however, the trees are also eight to twelve percent lighter and denser since 1900.
The authors note, Even though a greater volume of wood is being produced today, it now contains less material than just a few decades ago.The Arctic region, is particularly sensitive and warming faster than most other regions.
Particles of smoke can land on snow and ice, causing them to absorb sunlight that it would otherwise reflect, accelerating the warming.
Fires in the Arctic also increase the risk of permafrost thawing that releases methane   strong greenhouse gas.
Improving forecasting systems is important to solve the problem.
In view of the risks, WMO has created a Vegetation Fire and Smoke Pollution Warning and Advisory System for forecasting fires and related impacts and hazards across the globe.
WMOs Global Atmosphere Watch Programme has released a short video about the issue.
<Invasive species in forests>
An invasive species is any kind of living organism that is not native to an ecosystem that adversely affects it.
These negative effects can include the extinction of native plants or animals, biodiversity destruction, and permanent habitat alteration.Pine forests in British Columbia have been devastated by a pine beetle infestation, which has expanded unhindered since 1998 at least in part due to the lack of severe winters since that time a few days of extreme cold kill most mountain pine beetles and have kept outbreaks in the past naturally contained.
The infestation, which  has killed about half of the provinces lodgepole pines  is an order of magnitude larger than any previously recorded outbreak.
One reason for unprecedented host tree mortality may be due to that the mountain pine beetles have higher reproductive success in lodgepole pine trees growing in areas where the trees have not experienced frequent beetle epidemics, which includes much of the current outbreak area.
In 2007 the outbreak spread, via unusually strong winds, over the continental divide to Alberta.
An epidemic also started, be it at a lower rate, in 1999 in Colorado, Wyoming, and Montana.
The United States forest service predicts that between 2011 and 2013 virtually all 5 million acres  of Colorados lodgepole pine trees over five inches  in diameter will be lost.
<Taiga>
Climate change is having a disproportionate impact on boreal forests, which are warming at a faster rate than the global average.
leading to drier conditions in the Taiga, which leads to a whole host of subsequent issues.  Climate change has a direct impact on the productivity of the boreal forest, as well as health and regeneration.  As a result of the rapidly changing climate, trees are migrating to higher latitudes and altitudes , but some species may not be migrating fast enough to follow their climatic habitat.  Moreover, trees within the southern limit of their range may begin to show declines in growth.  Drier conditions are also leading to a shift from conifers to aspen in more fire and droughtprone areas.
<Assisted migration>
Assisted migration, the act of moving plants or animals to a different habitat, has been proposed as a solution to the above problem.
For species that may not be able to disperse easily, have long generation times or have small populations, this form of adaptive management and human intervention may help them survive in this rapidly changing climate.The assisted migration of North American forests has been discussed and debated by the science community for decades.
In the late 2000s and early 2010s, the Canadian provinces of Alberta and British Columbia finally acted and modified their tree reseeding guidelines to account for the northward movement of forests optimal ranges.
British Columbia even gave the green light for the relocation of a single species, the western larch, 1000 km northward.
<Mountain pine beetle and forest fires>
Climate change and the associated changing weather patterns occurring worldwide have a direct effect on biology, population ecology, and the population of eruptive insects, such as the mountain pine beetle .
This is because temperature is a factor which determines insect development and population success.
Mountain Pine Beetle are a species native to Western North America.
Prior to climatic and temperature changes, the mountain pine beetle predominately lived and attacked lodgepole and ponderosa pine trees at lower elevations, as the higher elevation Rocky Mountains and Cascades were too cold for their survival.
Under normal seasonal freezing weather conditions in the lower elevations, the forest ecosystems that pine beetles inhabit are kept in a balance by factors such as tree defense mechanisms, beetle defense mechanisms, and freezing temperatures.
It is a simple relationship between a host , an agent  and the environment .
However, as climate change causes mountain areas to become warmer and drier, pine beetles have more power to infest and destroy the forest ecosystems, such as the whitebark pine forests of the Rockies.
This is a forest so important to forest ecosystems that it is called the rooftop of the rockies.
Climate change has led to a threatening pine beetle pandemic, causing them to spread far beyond their native habitat.
This leads to ecosystem changes, forest fires, floods and hazards to human health.The whitebark pine ecosystem in these high elevations plays many essential roles, providing support to plant and animal life.  They provide food for grizzly bears and squirrels, as well as shelter and breeding grounds for elk and deer protects watersheds by sending water to parched foothills and plains serves as a reservoir by dispensing supplies of water from melted snowpacks that are trapped beneath the shaded areas and creates new soil which allows for growth of other trees and plant species.
Without these pines, animals do not have adequate food, water, or shelter, and the reproductive life cycle, as well as quality of life, is affected as a consequence.
Normally, the pine beetle cannot survive in these frigid temperatures and high elevation of the Rocky Mountains.
However, warmer temperatures means that the pine beetle can now survive and attack these forests, as it no longer is cold enough to freeze and kill the beetle at such elevations.
Increased temperatures also allow the pine beetle to increase their life cycle by 100 it only takes a single year instead of two for the pine beetle to develop.
As the Rockies have not adapted to deal with pine beetle infestations, they lack the defenses to fight the beetles.
Warmer weather patterns, drought, and beetle defense mechanisms together dries out sap in pine trees, which is the main mechanism of defense that trees have against the beetle, as it drowns the beetles and their eggs.
This makes it easier for the beetle to infest and release chemicals into the tree, luring other beetles in an attempt to overcome the weakened defense system of the pine tree.
As a consequence, the host  becomes more vulnerable to the diseasecausing agent .The whitebark forests of the Rockies are not the only forests that have been affected by the mountain pine beetle.
Due to temperature changes and wind patterns, the pine beetle has now spread through the Continental Divide of the Rockies and has invaded the fragile boreal forests of Alberta, known as the lungs of the Earth.
These forests are imperative for producing oxygen through photosynthesis and removing carbon in the atmosphere.
But as the forests become infested and die, carbon dioxide is released into the environment, and contributes even more to a warming climate.
Ecosystems and humans rely on the supply of oxygen in the environment, and threats to this boreal forest results in severe consequences to our planet and human health.
In a forest ravaged by pine beetle, the dead logs and kindle which can easily be ignited by lightning.
Forest fires present dangers to the environment, human health and the economy.  They are detrimental to air quality and vegetation, releasing toxic and carcinogenic compounds as they burn.
Due to human induced deforestation and climate change, along with the pine beetle pandemic, the strength of forest ecosystems decrease.
The infestations and resulting diseases can indirectly, but seriously, effect human health.
As droughts and temperature increases continue, so does the frequency of devastating forest fires, insect infestations, forest diebacks, acid rain, habitat loss, animal endangerment and threats to safe drinking water.
<Mountain habitats>
Mountains cover approximately 25 percent of earths surface and provide a home to more than onetenth of global human population.
Changes in global climate pose a number of potential risks to mountain habitats.
Researchers expect that over time, climate change will affect mountain and lowland ecosystems, the frequency and intensity of forest fires, the diversity of wildlife, and the distribution of fresh water.
Studies suggest a warmer climate would cause lowerelevation habitats to expand into the higher alpine zone.
Such a shift would encroach on rare alpine meadows and other highaltitude habitats.
Highelevation plants and animals have limited space available for new habitat as they move higher on the mountains in order to adapt to longterm changes in regional climate.
Such uphill shifts of both ranges and abundances have been recorded for various groups of species across the world.Changes in climate are melting glaciers and reducing the depth of the mountain snowpacks.
Any changes in their seasonal melting can have powerful impacts on areas that rely on freshwater runoff from mountains.
Rising temperature may cause snow to melt earlier and faster in the spring and shift the timing and distribution of runoff.
These changes could affect the availability of freshwater for natural systems and human uses.
<Marine ecosystems>
Monitoring studies on tropical coral reefs were made by Bak and Nieuwland  in order to explore climate change on the sublittoral communities in the North Sea.
Bak and Nieuwland  monitored permanent quadrates for over two decades and showed a significant decrease in coral colonies, particularly at disturbed shallower reefs.
Whereas most of the degradation processes are directly related to human influence, a rise in the temperature of ocean waters will lead to drastic reef degradation in the long run.
Rising temperatures increase the risk of irreversible loss of marine and coastal ecosystems 
<Freshwater ecosystems>
<Salt water contamination and cool water species>
Species of fish living in cold or cool water can see a reduction in population of up to 50 in the majority of U.S.
fresh water streams, according to most climate change models.
The increase in metabolic demands due to higher water temperatures, in combination with decreasing amounts of food will be the main contributors to their decline.
Additionally, many fish species  utilize seasonal water levels of streams as a means of reproducing, typically breeding when water flow is high and migrating to the ocean after spawning.
Because snowfall is expected to be reduced due to climate change, water runoff is expected to decrease which leads to lower flowing streams, effecting the spawning of millions of salmon.
To add to this, rising seas will begin to flood coastal river systems, converting them from fresh water habitats to saline environments where indigenous species will likely perish.
In southeast Alaska, the sea rises by 3.96 cmyear, redepositing sediment in various river channels and bringing salt water inland.
This rise in sea level not only contaminates streams and rivers with saline water, but also the reservoirs they are connected to, where species such as Sockeye Salmon live.
Although this species of Salmon can survive in both salt and fresh water, the loss of a body of fresh water stops them from reproducing in the spring, as the spawning process requires fresh water.
Undoubtedly, the loss of fresh water systems of lakes and rivers in Alaska will result in the imminent demise of the states onceabundant population of salmon.
<Species migration>
In the Arctic, the prevalent rise of CO2 and temperatures are changing the tundra plants and other xerophytic shrub composition in the ecosystem.
For example, in the Siberian subarctic, species migration is contributing to another warming albedofeedback, as needleshedding larch trees are being replaced with darkfoliage evergreen conifers which can absorb some of the solar radiation that previously reflected off the snowpack beneath the forest canopy.
It has been projected many fish species will migrate towards the North and South poles as a result of climate change, and that many species of fish near the Equator will go extinct as a result of global warming.Migratory birds are especially at risk for endangerment due to the extreme dependability on temperature and air pressure for migration, foraging, growth, and reproduction.
Much research has been done on the effects of climate change on birds, both for future predictions and for conservation.
The species said to be most at risk for endangerment or extinction are populations that are not of conservation concern.
It is predicted that a 3.5 degree increase in surface temperature will occur by year 2100, which could result in between 600 and 900 extinctions, which mainly will occur in the tropical environments.
<Species adaptation>
Climate change has affected the gene pool of the red deer population on Rùm, one of the Inner Hebrides islands, Scotland.
Warmer temperatures resulted in deer giving birth on average three days earlier for each decade of the study.
The gene which selects for earlier birth has increased in the population because those with the gene have more calves over their lifetime.A study in Chicago showed that the length of birds lower leg bones  shortened by an average of 2.4 and their wings lengthened by 1.3.
A study from central Amazon showed that birds have decreased in mass  by up to 2 per decade, and increased in wing length by up to 1 per decade, with links to temperature and precipitation shifts.
The findings of these studies suggest the morphological changes are the result of climate change, and may demonstrate an example of evolutionary change following Bergmanns rule.The Jutfelt Fish Ecophysiology lab at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology , under their director professor Fredrik Jutfelt, investigates how evolution can lead to physiological adaptation to the temperature environment where the fish live.
They recently performed a large artificial selection experiment, published in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , showing that evolution of tolerance to warming can occur in fish.
The rate of evolution, however, was suggested to be too slow for evolutionary rescue to protect fish from the impacts of climate change.
<Impacts of species degradation due to climate change on livelihoods>
The livelihoods of nature dependent communities depend on abundance and availability of certain species.
Climate change conditions such as increase in atmospheric temperature and carbon dioxide concentration directly affect availability of biomass energy, food, fiber and other ecosystem services.
Degradation of species supplying such products directly affect the livelihoods of people relying on them more so in Africa.
The situation is likely to be exacerbated by changes in rainfall variability which is likely to give dominance to invasive species especially those that are spread across large latitudinal gradients.
The effects that climate change has on both plant and animal species within certain ecosystems has the ability to directly affect the human inhabitants who rely on natural resources.
Frequently, the extinction of plant and animal species create a cyclic relationship of species endangerment in ecosystems which are directly affected by climate change.

<effect of climate change on ocean>
Among the effects of climate change on oceans are an increase of ocean temperatures, more frequent marine heatwaves, ocean acidification, a rise in sea level from ocean warming and ice sheet melting, sea ice decline, increased upper ocean stratification, reductions in oxygen levels, changes to ocean currents including a weakening of the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation.
All these changes have knockon effects which disturb marine ecosystems.
The primary factor causing these changes is the Earth warming due to humancaused emissions of greenhouse gases, such as carbon dioxide and methane.
This leads inevitably to ocean warming, because the ocean is taking up most of the additional heat in the climate system.
The ocean absorbs some of the extra carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and this causes the pH value of the ocean to drop.
It is estimated that the ocean absorbs about 25 of all humancaused CO2 emissions.Ocean temperature stratification increases as the ocean surface warms due to rising air temperatures.
471 The decline in mixing of the ocean layers stabilises warm water near the surface while reducing cold, deep water circulation.
The reduced up and down mixing reduces the ability of the ocean to absorb heat, directing a larger fraction of future warming toward the atmosphere and land.
The amount of energy available for tropical cyclones and other storms is expected to increase, while nutrients for fish in the upper ocean layers are expected to decrease, as is the oceans capacity to store carbon.
At the same time, contrasts in salinity are increasing salty areas are becoming saltier and fresher areas less salty.Warmer water cannot contain the same amount of oxygen as cold water.
As a result, the gas exchange equilibrium shifts, lowering ocean oxygen levels while increasing oxygen in the atmosphere.
Increased thermal stratification may result in a reduced supply of oxygen from surface waters to deeper waters, lowering the waters oxygen content further.
The ocean has already lost oxygen throughout its water column, and oxygen minimum zones are expanding worldwide.
471 These changes harm marine ecosystems, which can accelerate species extinctions or cause population explosions, altering species distribution.
This also affects coastal fishing and tourism.
Rising water temperatures will also harm various oceanic ecosystems, such as coral reefs.
The direct effect is coral bleaching on these reefs, which are sensitive to even minor temperature changes, so a small increase in temperature could have a significant impact in these environments.
Ocean acidification and temperature rise will also affect the productivity and distribution of species within the ocean, threatening fisheries and upsetting marine ecosystems.
Loss of sea ice habitats due to warming will severely impact the many polar species that rely on it.
The interactions between many of these climate change factors increase pressures on the climate system and ocean ecosystems.
<Changes due to rising greenhouse gas levels>
Presently , atmospheric carbon dioxide  levels of more than 410 parts per million  are nearly 50 higher than preindustrial levels.
These elevated levels and rapid growth rates are unprecedented in the geological records 55 million years.
The source for this excess CO2 is clearly established as humandriven, reflecting a mix of fossil fuel burning, industrial, and landuselandchange emissions.
The idea that the ocean serves as a major sink for anthropogenic CO2 has been discussed in scientific literature since at least the late 1950s.
Several pieces of evidence point to the ocean absorbing roughly a quarter of total anthropogenic CO2 emissions.
The latest key findings about the observed changes and impacts from 2019 includeIt is virtually certain that the global ocean has warmed unabated since 1970 and has taken up more than 90 of the excess heat in the climate system .
Since 1993, the rate of ocean warming has more than doubled .
Marine heatwaves have very likely doubled in frequency since 1982 and are increasing in intensity .
By absorbing more CO2, the ocean has undergone increasing surface acidification .
A loss of oxygen has occurred from the surface to 1000 m .
<Rising ocean temperature>
It is clear that the ocean is warming as a result of climate change, and this rate of warming is increasing.
9  The global ocean was the warmest it had ever been recorded by humans in 2022.
This is determined by the ocean heat content, which exceeded the previous 2021 maximum in 2022.
The steady rise in ocean temperatures is an unavoidable result of the Earths energy imbalance, which is primarily caused by rising levels of greenhouse gases.
Between preindustrial times and the 2011 to 2020 decade, the oceans surface has heated between 0.68 and 1.01 °C.
1214 The upper ocean  is warming the fastest, but the warming trend is widespread.
The majority of ocean heat gain occurs in the Southern Ocean.
For example, between the 1950s and the 1980s, the temperature of the Antarctic Southern Ocean rose by 0.17 °C , nearly twice the rate of the global ocean.The warming rate varies with depth at a depth of a thousand metres the warming occurs at a rate of nearly 0.4 °C per century , whereas warming occurs at only half that depth.
<Ocean heat content>
The ocean temperature varies from place to place.
Temperatures are higher near the equator and lower at the poles.
As a result, changes in total ocean heat content best illustrate ocean warming.
When compared to 1969 to 1993, heat uptake has increased between 1993 and 2017.
<Reducing ocean pH value>
<Effects on the physical environment>
<Sea level rise>
Many coastal cities will experience coastal flooding in the coming decades and beyond.
1318  Local subsidence, which may be natural but can be increased by human activity, can exacerbate coastal flooding.
Coastal flooding will threaten hundreds of millions of people by 2050, particularly in Southeast Asia.
<Changing ocean currents>
Ocean currents are caused by temperature variations caused by sunlight and air temperatures at various latitudes, as well as prevailing winds and the different densities of salt and fresh water.
Warm air rises near the equator.
Later, as it moves toward the poles, it cools again.
Cool air sinks near the poles,  but warms and rises again as it moves toward the equator.
This produces Hadley cells, which are largescale wind patterns, with similar effects driving a midlatitude cell in each hemisphere.
Wind patterns associated with these circulation cells drive surface currents which push the surface water to higher latitudes where the air is colder.
This cools the water, causing it to become very dense in comparison to lower latitude waters, causing it to sink to the ocean floor, forming North Atlantic Deep Water  in the north and Antarctic Bottom Water  in the south.Driven by this sinking and the upwelling that occurs in lower latitudes, as well as the driving force of the winds on surface water, the ocean currents act to circulate water throughout the sea.
When global warming is factored in, changes occur, particularly in areas where deep water is formed.
As the oceans warm and glaciers and polar ice caps melt, more and more fresh water is released into the high latitude regions where deep water forms, lowering the density of the surface water.
As a result, the water sinks more slowly than it would normally.The Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation  may have weakened since the preindustrial era, according to modern observations and paleoclimate reconstructions , but there is too much uncertainty in the data to know for certain.
1237  Climate change projections assessed in 2021 indicate that the AMOC is very likely to weaken over the course of the 21st century.
1214  A weakening of this magnitude could have a significant impact on global climate, with the North Atlantic being particularly vulnerable.
19  This would have an impact in areas warmed by the North Atlantic drift, such as Scandinavia and Britain.
Any changes in ocean currents affect the oceans ability to absorb carbon dioxide  as well as ocean productivity because the currents transport nutrients .
Because the AMOC deep ocean circulation is slow , it is slow to respond to climate change.
<Increasing stratification>
Changes in ocean stratification are significant because they can influence productivity and oxygen levels.
The separation of water into layers based on a specific quantity is known as stratification.
Stratification by layers occurs in all ocean basins.
The stratified layers act as a barrier to the water mixing, affecting the exchange of heat, carbon, oxygen and other nutrients.
Since 1970, there has been an increase in stratification in the upper ocean due to global warming and, in some areas, salinity changes.
The salinity changes are caused by evaporation in tropical waters, which results in higher salinity and density levels.
Meanwhile, melting ice can cause a decrease in salinity at higher latitudes.Water density is affected by temperature and salinity.
As a result, the water column in the vast ocean basins is stratified, with less dense water near the surface and denser water deeper.
This stratification is important not only in the formation of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation which has global weather and climate implications.
It is also significant because stratification regulates nutrient transport from deep water to the surface.
This contributes to ocean productivity and is linked to the compensatory downward flow of water that transports oxygen from the atmosphere and surface waters into the deep sea.The oceans mid depth mix slowly with the surface waters, and the decay of sinking organic matter from primary production in these waters naturally results in low oxygen levels.
Warming, on the other hand, reduces the amount of oxygen that dissolves in surface waters.
Furthermore, increasing stratification isolates these middepth waters even more, resulting in lower oxygen levels .
The open ocean is losing oxygen, and this trend is expected to continue as a result of climate change, with overall oxygen levels dropping by several percent.
This will have ecological consequences in areas where oxygen concentrations are low, though the overall biological consequences are minor.
<Reduced oxygen levels>
Climate change affects ocean oxygen.
There are two areas of concern in terms of ocean oxygen levels The open ocean mid depth waters and the coastal waters.The first area of concern relates to the middepth waters of the open ocean, which are naturally low in oxygen.
This is because these areas, known as oxygen minimum zones, are isolated from the atmosphere by sluggish ocean circulation, isolating these waters from the atmosphere  for decades, while sinking organic matter from surface waters is broken down consuming the available oxygen.
These low oxygen ocean areas are expanding as a result of ocean warming which both reduces water circulation and also reduces the oxygen content of that water, while the solubility of oxygen declines as the temperature rises. 
Overall ocean oxygen concentrations are estimated to have declined 2 over 50 years from the 1960s.
The nature of the ocean circulation means that in general these low oxygen regions are more pronounced in the Pacific Ocean.
Low oxygen represents a stress for almost all marine animals.
Very low oxygen levels create regions with much reduced fauna.
It is predicted that these low oxygen zones will expand in future due to climate change, and this represents a serious threat to marine life in these oxygen minimum zones.   
The second area of concern relates to coastal waters where increasing nutrient supply from rivers to coastal areas leads to increasing production and sinking organic matter which in some coastal regions leads to extreme oxygen depletion, sometimes referred to as dead zones.
These dead zones are expanding driven particularly by increasing nutrient inputs, but also compounded by increasing ocean stratification driven by climate change.
<Changes to Earths weather system and wind patterns>
Climate change and the associated warming of the ocean will lead to widespread changes to the Earths climate and weather system including increased tropical cyclone and monsoon intensities and weather extremes with some areas becoming wetter and others drier, therefore challenging current systems of agriculture.
Changing wind patterns are predicted to increase wave heights in some areas.
1310  This can pose risks to mariners and also to marine structures.
<Intensifying tropical cyclones>
Humaninduced climate change continues to warm the oceans which provide the memory of past accumulated effects.
The result is a higher ocean heat content and higher sea surface temperatures.
In turn, this invigorates tropical cyclones to make them more intense, bigger, longer lasting and greatly increases their flooding rains.
One example is Hurricane Harvey in 2017.
<Salinity changes>
Due to global warming and increased glacier melt, thermohaline circulation patterns may be altered by increasing amounts of freshwater released into oceans and, therefore, changing ocean salinity.
Thermohaline circulation is responsible for bringing up cold, nutrientrich water from the depths of the ocean, a process known as upwelling.Seawater consists of fresh water and salt, and the concentration of salt in seawater is called salinity.
Salt does not evaporate, thus the precipitation and evaporation of freshwater influences salinity strongly.
Changes in the water cycle are therefore strongly visible in surface salinity measurements, which has been known since the 1930s.The long term observation records show a clear trend the global salinity patterns are amplifying in this period.
This means that the high saline regions have become more saline, and regions of low salinity have become less saline.
The regions of high salinity are dominated by evaporation, and the increase in salinity shows that evaporation is increasing even more.
The same goes for regions of low salinity that are becoming less saline, which indicates that precipitation is becoming more intensified.
<Sea ice decline and changes>
Sea ice decline occurs more in the Arctic than in Antarctica, where it is more a matter of changing sea ice conditions. 
<Time scales>
Many oceanrelated elements of the climate system respond slowly to warming.
For instance, acidification of the deep ocean will continue for millennia, and the same is true for the increase in ocean heat content.
43  Similarly, sea level rise will continue for centuries or even millennia even if greenhouse gas emissions are brought to zero, due to the slow response of ice sheets to warming and the continued uptake of heat by the oceans, which expand when warmed.
<Impacts on marine life>
Climate change will not only alter the overall productivity of the ocean, but it will also alter the structure of the oceans biomass community.
In general, species are expected to move towards the poles as a result.
Some species have already moved hundreds of kilometres since the 1950s.
Phytoplankton bloom timings are also already altering moving earlier in the season particularly in polar waters.
These trends are projected to intensify with further progress of climate change.There are additional potentially important impacts of climate change on seabirds, fish and mammals in polar regions where populations with highly specialised survival strategies will need to adapt to major changes in habitat and food supply.
In addition, sea ice often plays a key role in their life cycle.
In the Arctic for example, providing haulout sites for seals and walruses, and for hunting routes for polar bears.
In the Antarctic, sea bird and penguin distributions are also believed to be very sensitive to climate change, although the impacts to date vary in different regions.
<Impacts on oceanic calcifying organisms>
<Coral reefs and other shelfsea ecosystems>
While some mobile marine species can migrate in response to climate change, others such as corals find this much more difficult.
A coral reef is an underwater ecosystem characterized by reefbuilding corals.
Reefs are formed by colonies of coral polyps held together by calcium carbonate.
Coral reefs are important centres of biodiversity and vital to millions of people who rely on them for coastal protection, food and for sustaining tourism in many regions.Warm water corals are clearly in decline, with losses of 50 over the last 30 to 50 years due to multiple threats from ocean warming, ocean acidification, pollution and physical damage from activities such as fishing.
These pressures are expected to intensify.The warming ocean surface waters can lead to bleaching of the corals which can cause serious damage andor coral death.
The IPCC Sixth Assessment Report in 2022 found that Since the early 1980s, the frequency and severity of mass coral bleaching events have increased sharply worldwide.
416  Coral reefs, as well as other shelfsea ecosystems, such as rocky shores, kelp forests, seagrasses and mangroves have recently undergone mass mortalities from marine heatwaves.
381  It is expected that many coral reefs will suffer irreversible changes and loss due to marine heatwaves with global temperatures increasing by more than 1.5 °C.
382 Coral bleaching occurs when thermal stress from a warming ocean results in the expulsion of the symbiotic algae that resides within coral tissues.
These symbiotic algae are the reason for the bright, vibrant colors of coral reefs.
A 12°C sustained increase in seawater temperatures is sufficient for bleaching to occur, which turns corals white.
If a coral is bleached for a prolonged period of time, death may result.
In the Great Barrier Reef, before 1998 there were no such events.
The first event happened in 1998 and after that, they begun to occur more frequently.
Between 2016  2020 there were three of them.Apart from coral bleaching, the reducing pH value in oceans is also a problem for coral reefs because ocean acidification reduces coralline algal biodiversity.
The physiology of coralline algal calcification determines how the algae will respond to ocean acidification.
<Ocean productivity>
The process of photosynthesis in the surface ocean releases oxygen and consumes carbon dioxide.
This photosynthesis in the ocean is dominated by phytoplankton  microscopic free floating algae.
After the plants grow, bacterial decomposition of the organic matter formed by photosynthesis in the ocean consumes oxygen and releases carbon dioxide.
The sinking and bacterial decomposition of some organic matter in deep ocean water, at depths where the waters are out of contact with the atmosphere, leads to a reduction in oxygen concentrations and increase in carbon dioxide, carbonate and bicarbonate.
This cycling of carbon dioxide in oceans is an important part of the global carbon cycle.  
The photosynthesis in surface waters consumes nutrients  and transfers these nutrients to deep water as the organic matter produced by photosynthesis sinks upon the death of the organisms.
Productivity in surface waters therefore depends in part on the transfer of nutrients from deep water back to the surface by ocean mixing and currents.
The increasing stratification of the oceans due to climate change therefore acts generally to reduce ocean productivity.
However, in some areas, such as previously ice covered regions, productivity may increase.
This trend is already observable and is projected to continue under current projected climate change.
In the Indian Ocean for example, productivity is estimated to have declined over the past sixty years due to climate warming and is projected to continue.A study that describes climatedriven trends in contemporary ocean productivity looked at globalocean net primary production  changes detected from satellite measurements of ocean color from 1997 to 2006.
These measurements can be used to quantify ocean productivity on a global scale and relate changes to environmental factors.
They found an initial increase in NPP from 1997 to 1999 followed by a continuous decrease in productivity after 1999.
These trends are propelled by the expansion of stratified lowlatitude oceans and are closely linked to climate variability.This declining trend in ocean productivity is expected to continue with productivity likely to decline by 411 by 2100 .
452  The decline will show regional variations.
For example, the tropical ocean NPP will decline more by 7 to 16 for the same emissions scenario.
452  The flux of organic matter from the upper ocean into the ocean interior will decrease because of increased stratification and reduced nutrient supply.
452  The reduction in ocean productivity is due to the combined effects of warming, stratification, light, nutrients and predation.
<Effects on fisheries>
The sustainable harvest of fish from the ocean depends on ocean productivity.
As ocean productivity decreases, the potential maximum fish catch in countries exclusive economic zones will also decrease.
This catch is projected to decline globally, with different models predicting declines between 5 and 25 by the end of the century.
Within this average global decline, declines in some regions such as the South Pacific are projected to be larger, and threaten the food security of local populations. 
<Harmful algal blooms>
Although the drivers of harmful algal blooms  are poorly understood, they appear to have increased in range and frequency in coastal areas since the 1980s.
16  This is the result of human induced factors such as increased nutrient inputs  and climate change .
16  The parameters that affect the formation of HABs are ocean warming, marine heatwaves, oxygen loss, eutrophication and water pollution.
582  These increases in HABs are of concern because of the impact of their occurrence on local food security, tourism and the economy.
16 It is however also possible that the perceived global increase in HABs is simply due to better monitoring and more detrimental bloom impacts and not due to a climatelinked mechanism.
463 Spatially, all algal species  may experience range expansion, contraction, or latitudinal shifts.
Temporally, the seasonal windows of growth may expand or decrease.
<Impacts on marine mammals>
Some effects on marine mammals, especially those in the Arctic, are very direct such as loss of habitat, temperature stress, and exposure to severe weather.
Other effects are more indirect, such as changes in host pathogen associations, changes in body condition because of predatorprey interaction, changes in exposure to toxins and CO2 emissions, and increased human interactions.  Despite the large potential impacts of ocean warming on marine mammals, the global vulnerability of marine mammals to global warming is still poorly understood.Marine mammals have evolved to live in oceans, but climate change is affecting their natural habitat.
Some species may not adapt fast enough, which might lead to their extinction.It has been generally assumed that the Arctic marine mammals were the most vulnerable in the face of climate change given the substantial observed and projected decline in Arctic sea ice.
However, research has shown that the North Pacific Ocean, the Greenland Sea and the Barents Sea host the species that are most vulnerable to global warming.
The North Pacific has already been identified as a hotspot for human threats for marine mammals and is now also a hotspot for vulnerability to global warming.
Marine mammals in this region will face double jeopardy from both human activities  and global warming, with potential additive or synergetic effects.
As a result, these ecosystems face irreversible consequences for marine ecosystem functioning.Marine organisms usually tend to encounter relatively stable temperatures compared to terrestrial species and thus are likely to be more sensitive to temperature change than terrestrial organisms.
Therefore, the ocean warming will lead to the migration of increased species, as endangered species look for a more suitable habitat.
If sea temperatures continue to rise, then some fauna may move to cooler water and some rangeedge species may disappear from regional waters or experience a reduced global range.
Change in the abundance of some species will alter the food resources available to marine mammals, which then results in marine mammals biogeographic shifts.
Furthermore, if a species is unable to successfully migrate to a suitable environment, it will be at risk of extinction if it cannot adapt to rising temperatures of the ocean.
Arctic sea ice decline leads to loss of the sea ice habitat, elevations of water and air temperature, and increased occurrence of severe weather.
The loss of sea ice habitat will reduce the abundance of seal prey for marine mammals, particularly polar bears.
Sea ice changes may also have indirect effects on animal heath due to changes in the transmission of pathogens, impacts on animals body condition due to shifts in the preybased food web, and increased exposure to toxicants as a result of increased human habitation in the Arctic habitat.Sea level rise is also important when assessing the impacts of global warming on marine mammals, since it affects coastal environments that marine mammal species rely on.
<Polar bears>
<Seals>
Seals are another marine mammal that are susceptible to climate change.
Much like polar bears, some seal species have evolved to rely on sea ice.
They use the ice platforms for breeding and raising young seal pups.
In 2010 and 2011, sea ice in the Northwest Atlantic was at or near an alltime low and harp seals as well as ringed seals that bred on thin ice saw increased death rates.
Antarctic fur seals in South Georgia in the South Atlantic Ocean saw extreme reductions over a 20year study, during which scientists measured increased sea surface temperature anomalies.
<Dolphins>
Dolphins are marine mammals with broad geographic extent, making them susceptible to climate change in various ways.
The most common effect of climate change on dolphins is the increasing water temperatures across the globe.
This has caused a large variety of dolphin species to experience range shifts, in which the species move from their typical geographic region to cooler waters.
Another side effect of increasing water temperatures is the increase in harmful algae blooms, which has caused a mass dieoff of bottlenose dolphins.Climate change has had a significant impact on various dolphin species.
For example In the Mediterranean, increased sea surface temperatures, salinity, upwelling intensity, and sea levels have led to a reduction in prey resources, causing a steep decline in the shortbeaked common dolphin subpopulation in the Mediterranean, which was classified as endangered in 2003.
At the Shark Bay World Heritage Area in Western Australia, the local population of the IndoPacific bottlenose dolphin had a significant decline following a marine heatwave in 2011.
River dolphins are highly affected by climate change as high evaporation rates, increased water temperatures, decreased precipitation, and increased acidification occur.
<Potential feedback effects>
<Methane release from methane clathrate>
Rising ocean temperatures also have the potential to impact methane clathrate reservoirs located under the ocean floor sediments.
These trap large amounts of the greenhouse gas methane, which ocean warming has the potential to release.
However, it is currently considered unlikely that gas clathrates  in subsea clathrates will lead to a detectable departure from the emissions trajectory during this century.
107 In 2004 the global inventory of ocean methane clathrates was estimated to occupy between one and five million cubic kilometres.
<Prevention>
The methods to prevent or reduce further effects of climate change on oceans involve globalscale reduction in greenhouse gas emissions , as well as regional and local mitigation and management strategies moving forward.

<climate sensitivity>
Climate sensitivity is a measure of how much Earths surface will cool or warm after a specified factor causes a change in its climate system, such as how much it will warm for a doubling in the atmospheric carbon dioxide  concentration.
In technical terms, climate sensitivity is the average change in global mean surface temperature in response to a radiative forcing, which drives a difference between Earths incoming and outgoing energy.
Climate sensitivity is a key measure in climate science, and a focus area for climate scientists, who want to understand the ultimate consequences of anthropogenic global warming.
The Earths surface warms as a direct consequence of increased atmospheric CO2, as well as increased concentrations of other greenhouse gases such as nitrous oxide and methane.
The increasing temperatures have secondary effects on the climate system, such as an increase in atmospheric water vapour, which is itself also a greenhouse gas.
Scientists do not know exactly how strong the climate feedbacks are and it is difficult to predict the precise amount of warming that will result from a given increase in greenhouse gas concentrations.
If climate sensitivity turns out to be on the high side of scientific estimates, the Paris Agreement goal of limiting global warming to below 2 °C  will be difficult to achieve.The two primary types of climate sensitivity are the shorterterm transient climate response, the increase in global average temperature that is expected to have occurred at a time when the atmospheric CO2 concentration has doubled, and equilibrium climate sensitivity, the higher longterm increase in global average temperature expected to occur after the effects of a doubled CO2 concentration have had time to reach a steady state.
Climate sensitivity is typically estimated in three ways using direct observations of temperature and levels of greenhouse gases taken during the industrial age, using indirectlyestimated temperature and other measurements from the Earths more distant past, and computer modelling the various aspects of the climate system with computers.
<Background>
The rate at which energy reaches Earth as sunlight and leaves Earth as heat radiation to space must balance, or the total amount of heat energy on the planet at any one time will rise or fall, which results in a planet that is warmer or cooler overall.
A driver of an imbalance between the rates of incoming and outgoing radiation energy is called radiative forcing.
A warmer planet radiates heat to space faster and so a new balance is eventually reached, with a higher temperature and stored energy content.
However, the warming of the planet also has knockon effects, which create further warming in an exacerbating feedback loop.
Climate sensitivity is a measure of how much temperature change a given amount of radiative forcing will cause.  The conceptual framework is similar to that applied to evaluating the influences of economic externalities.
<Radiative forcing>
Radiative forcings are generally quantified as Watts per square meter  and averaged over Earths uppermost surface defined as the top of the atmosphere.  The magnitude of a forcing is specific to the physical driver and is defined relative to an accompanying time span of interest for its application.  In the context of a contribution to longterm climate sensitivity from 1750 to 2020, the 50 increase in atmospheric CO2 is characterized by a forcing of about 2.1 Wm2.   In the context of shorterterm contributions to Earths energy imbalance , time intervals of interest may be as short as the interval between measurement or simulation data samplings, and are thus likely to be accompanied by smaller forcing values.  Forcings from such investigations have also been analyzed and reported at decadal time scales.Radiative forcing leads to longterm changes in global temperature.
A number of factors contribute radiative forcing increased downwelling radiation from the greenhouse effect, variability in solar radiation from changes in planetary orbit, changes in solar irradiance, direct and indirect effects caused by aerosols , and changes in land use .
In contemporary research, radiative forcing by greenhouse gases is well understood.
As of 2019, large uncertainties remain for aerosols.
<Key numbers>
Carbon dioxide  levels rose from 280 parts per million  in the 18th century, when humans in the Industrial Revolution started burning significant amounts of fossil fuel such as coal, to over 415 ppm by 2020.
As CO2 is a greenhouse gas, it hinders heat energy from leaving the Earths atmosphere.
In 2016, atmospheric CO2 levels had increased by 45 over preindustrial levels, and radiative forcing caused by increased CO2 was already more than 50 higher than in preindustrial times because of nonlinear effects.
Between the 18thcentury start of the Industrial Revolution and the year 2020, the Earths temperature rose by a little over one degree Celsius .
<Societal importance>
Because the economics of climate change mitigation depend greatly on how quickly carbon neutrality needs to be achieved, climate sensitivity estimates can have important economic and policymaking implications.
One study suggests that halving the uncertainty of the value for transient climate response  could save trillions of dollars.
Scientists are uncertain about the precision of estimates of greenhouse gas increases on future temperature since a higher climate sensitivity would mean more dramatic increases in temperature, which makes it more prudent to take significant climate action.
If climate sensitivity turns out to be on the high end of what scientists estimate, the Paris Agreement goal of limiting global warming to well below 2 °C cannot be achieved, and temperature increases will exceed that limit, at least temporarily.
One study estimated that emissions cannot be reduced fast enough to meet the 2 °C goal if equilibrium climate sensitivity  is higher than 3.4 °C .
The more sensitive the climate system is to changes in greenhouse gas concentrations, the more likely it is to have decades when temperatures are much higher or much lower than the longerterm average.
<Contributors>
Radiative forcing is one component of climate change.
The radiative forcing caused by a doubling of atmospheric CO2 levels  is approximately 3.7 watts per square meter .
In the absence of feedbacks, the energy imbalance would eventually result in roughly 1 °C  of global warming.
That figure is straightforward to calculate by using the StefanBoltzmann law and is undisputed.A further contribution arises from climate feedback, both exacerbating and suppressing.
The uncertainty in climate sensitivity estimates is entirely from the modelling of feedbacks in the climate system, including water vapour feedback, icealbedo feedback, cloud feedback, and lapse rate feedback.  Suppressing feedbacks tend to counteract warming by increasing the rate at which energy is radiated to space from a warmer planet.
Exacerbating feedbacks increase warming for example, higher temperatures can cause ice to melt, which reduces the ice area and the amount of sunlight the ice reflects, which in turn results in less heat energy being radiated back into space.
Climate sensitivity depends on the balance between those feedbacks.
<Measures>
Depending on the time scale, there are two main ways to define climate sensitivity the shortterm transient climate response  and the longterm equilibrium climate sensitivity , both of which  incorporate the warming from exacerbating feedback loops.
They are not discrete categories, but they overlap.
Sensitivity to atmospheric CO2 increases is measured in the amount of temperature change for doubling in the atmospheric CO2 concentration.Although the term climate sensitivity is usually used for the sensitivity to radiative forcing caused by rising atmospheric CO2, it is a general property of the climate system.
Other agents can also cause a radiative imbalance.
Climate sensitivity is the change in surface air temperature per unit change in radiative forcing, and the climate sensitivity parameter is therefore expressed in units of °C.
Climate sensitivity is approximately the same whatever the reason for the radiative forcing .
When climate sensitivity is expressed as the temperature change for a level of atmospheric CO2 double the preindustrial level, its units are degrees Celsius .
<Transient climate response>
The transient climate response  is defined as the change in the global mean surface temperature, averaged over a 20year period, centered at the time of atmospheric carbon dioxide doubling, in a climate model simulation in which the atmospheric CO2 concentration increases at 1 per year.
That estimate is generated by using shorterterm simulations.
The transient response is lower than the equilibrium climate sensitivity because slower feedbacks, which exacerbate the temperature increase, take more time to respond in full to an increase in the atmospheric CO2 concentration.
For instance, the deep ocean takes many centuries to reach a new steady state after a perturbation during which it continues to serve as heatsink, which cools the upper ocean.
The IPCC literature assessment estimates that the TCR likely lies between 1 °C  and 2.5 °C .A related measure is the transient climate response to cumulative carbon emissions , which is the globally averaged surface temperature change after 1000 GtC of CO2 has been emitted.
As such, it includes not only temperature feedbacks to forcing but also the carbon cycle and carbon cycle feedbacks.
<Equilibrium climate sensitivity>
The equilibrium climate sensitivity  is the longterm temperature rise  that is expected to result from a doubling of the atmospheric CO2 concentration .
It is a prediction of the new global mean nearsurface air temperature once the CO2 concentration has stopped increasing, and most of the feedbacks have had time to have their full effect.
Reaching an equilibrium temperature can take centuries or even millennia after CO2 has doubled.
ECS is higher than TCR because of the oceans shortterm buffering effects.
Computer models are used for estimating the ECS.
A comprehensive estimate means that modelling the whole time span during which significant feedbacks continue to change global temperatures in the model, such as fullyequilibrating ocean temperatures, requires running a computer model that covers thousands of years.
There are, however, less computingintensive methods.The IPCC Sixth Assessment Report  stated that there is high confidence that ECS is within the range of 2.5 °C to 4 °C, with a best estimate of 3 °C.The long time scales involved with ECS make it arguably a less relevant measure for policy decisions around climate change.
<Effective climate sensitivity>
A common approximation to ECS is the effective equilibrium climate sensitivity, is an estimate of equilibrium climate sensitivity by using data from a climate system in model or realworld observations that is not yet in equilibrium.
Estimates assume that the net amplification effect of feedbacks, as measured after some period of warming, will remain constant afterwards.
That is not necessarily true, as feedbacks can change with time.
In many climate models, feedbacks become stronger over time and so the effective climate sensitivity is lower than the real ECS.
<Earth system sensitivity>
By definition, equilibrium climate sensitivity does not include feedbacks that take millennia to emerge, such as longterm changes in Earths albedo because of changes in ice sheets and vegetation.
It includes the slow response of the deep oceans warming, which also takes millennia, and so ECS fails to reflect the actual future warming that would occur if CO2 is stabilized at double preindustrial values.
Earth system sensitivity  incorporates the effects of these slower feedback loops, such as the change in Earths albedo from the melting of large continental ice sheets, which covered much of the Northern Hemisphere during the Last Glacial Maximum and still cover Greenland and Antarctica.
Changes in albedo as a result of changes in vegetation, as well as changes in ocean circulation, are also included.
The longerterm feedback loops make the ESS larger than the ECS, possibly twice as large.
Data from the geological history of Earth is used in estimating ESS.
Differences between modern and longago climatic conditions mean that estimates of the future ESS are highly uncertain.
Unlike ECS and TCR, the carbon cycle is not included in the definition of the ESS, but all other elements of the climate system are included.
<Sensitivity to nature of forcing>
Different forcing agents, such as greenhouse gases and aerosols, can be compared using their radiative forcing, the initial radiative imbalance averaged over the entire globe.
Climate sensitivity is the amount of warming per radiative forcing.
To a first approximation, the cause of the radiative imbalance does not matter whether it is greenhouse gases or something else.
However, radiative forcing from sources other than CO2 can cause a somewhat larger or smaller surface warming than a similar radiative forcing from CO2.
The amount of feedback varies mainly because the forcings are not uniformly distributed over the globe.
Forcings that initially warm the Northern Hemisphere, land, or polar regions are more strongly systematically effective at changing temperatures than an equivalent forcing from CO2, which is more uniformly distributed over the globe.
That is because those regions have more selfreinforcing feedbacks, such as the icealbedo feedback.
Several studies indicate that humanemitted aerosols are more effective than CO2 at changing global temperatures, and volcanic forcing is less effective.
When climate sensitivity to CO2 forcing is estimated by using historical temperature and forcing , and that effect is not taken into account, climate sensitivity is underestimated.
<State dependence>
Climate sensitivity has been defined as the short or longterm temperature change resulting from any doubling of CO2, but there is evidence that the sensitivity of Earths climate system is not constant.
For instance, the planet has polar ice and highaltitude glaciers.
Until the worlds ice has completely melted, an exacerbating icealbedo feedback loop makes the system more sensitive overall.
Throughout Earths history, multiple periods are thought to have snow and ice cover almost the entire globe.
In most models of Snowball Earth,, parts of the tropics were at least intermittently free of ice cover.
As the ice advanced or retreated, climate sensitivity must have been very high, as the large changes in area of ice cover would have made for a very strong icealbedo feedback.
Volcanic atmospheric composition changes are thought to have provided the radiative forcing needed to escape the snowball state.
Throughout the Quaternary period , climate has oscillated between glacial periods, the most recent one being the Last Glacial Maximum, and interglacial periods, the most recent one being the current Holocene, but the periods climate sensitivity is difficult to determine.
The PaleoceneEocene Thermal Maximum, about 55.5 million years ago, was unusually warm and may have been characterized by aboveaverage climate sensitivity.Climate sensitivity may further change if tipping points are crossed.
It is unlikely that tipping points will cause shortterm changes in climate sensitivity.
If a tipping point is crossed, climate sensitivity is expected to change at the time scale of the subsystem that hits its tipping point.
Especially if there are multiple interacting tipping points, the transition of climate to a new state may be difficult to reverse.The two most common definitions of climate sensitivity specify the climate state the ECS and the TCR are defined for a doubling with respect to the CO2 levels in the preindustrial era.
Because of potential changes in climate sensitivity, the climate system may warm by a different amount after a second doubling of CO2 from after a first doubling.
The effect of any change in climate sensitivity is expected to be small or negligible in the first century after additional CO2 is released into the atmosphere.
<Estimates>
<Historical estimates>
Svante Arrhenius in the 19th century was the first person to quantify global warming as a consequence of a doubling of the concentration of CO2.
In his first paper on the matter, he estimated that global temperature would rise by around 5 to 6 °C  if the quantity of CO2 was doubled.
In later work, he revised that estimate to 4 °C .
Arrhenius used Samuel Pierpont Langleys observations of radiation emitted by the full moon to estimate the amount of radiation that was absorbed by water vapour and by CO2.
To account for water vapour feedback, he assumed that relative humidity would stay the same under global warming.The first calculation of climate sensitivity that used detailed measurements of absorption spectra, as well as the first calculation to use a computer for numerical integration of the radiative transfer through the atmosphere, was performed by Syukuro Manabe and Richard Wetherald in 1967.
Assuming constant humidity, they computed an equilibrium climate sensitivity of 2.3 °C per doubling of CO2, which they rounded to 2 °C, the value most often quoted from their work, in the abstract of the paper.
The work has been called arguably the greatest climatescience paper of all time and the most influential study of climate of all time.A committee on anthropogenic global warming, convened in 1979 by the United States National Academy of Sciences and chaired by Jule Charney, estimated equilibrium climate sensitivity to be 3 °C , plus or minus 1.5 °C .
The Manabe and Wetherald estimate , James E.
Hansens estimate of 4 °C , and Charneys model were the only models available in 1979.
According to Manabe, speaking in 2004, Charney chose 0.5 °C as a reasonable margin of error, subtracted it from Manabes number, and added it to Hansens, giving rise to the 1.5 to 4.5 °C  range of likely climate sensitivity that has appeared in every greenhouse assessment since ....
In 2008, climatologist Stefan Rahmstorf said At that time , the  range  was on very shaky ground.
Since then, many vastly improved models have been developed by a number of climate research centers around the world.
<Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change>
Despite considerable progress in the understanding of Earths climate system, assessments continued to report similar uncertainty ranges for climate sensitivity for some time after the 1979 Charney report.
The 1990 IPCC First Assessment Report estimated that equilibrium climate sensitivity to a doubling of CO2 lay between 1.5 and 4.5 °C , with a best guess in the light of current knowledge of 2.5 °C .
The report used models with simplified representations of ocean dynamics.
The IPCC supplementary report, 1992, which used fullocean circulation models, saw no compelling reason to warrant changing the 1990 estimate and the IPCC Second Assessment Report stated, No strong reasons have emerged to change , In the reports, much of the uncertainty around climate sensitivity was attributed to insufficient knowledge of cloud processes.
The 2001 IPCC Third Assessment Report also retained this likely range.Authors of the 2007 IPCC Fourth Assessment Report stated that confidence in estimates of equilibrium climate sensitivity had increased substantially since the Third Annual Report.
The IPCC authors concluded that ECS is very likely to be greater than 1.5 °C  and likely to lie in the range 2 to 4.5 °C , with a most likely value of about 3 °C .
The IPCC stated that fundamental physical reasons and data limitations prevent a climate sensitivity higher than 4.5 °C  from being ruled out, but the climate sensitivity estimates in the likely range agreed better with observations and the proxy climate data.The 2013 IPCC Fifth Assessment Report reverted to the earlier range of 1.5 to 4.5 °C  , because some estimates using industrialage data came out low.  The report also stated that ECS is extremely unlikely to be less than 1 °C  , and it is very unlikely to be greater than 6 °C  .
Those values were estimated by combining the available data with expert judgement.When the IPCC began to produce its IPCC Sixth Assessment Report, many climate models began to show a higher climate sensitivity.
The estimates for Equilibrium Climate Sensitivity changed from 3.2 °C to 3.7 °C and the estimates for the Transient climate response from 1.8 °C, to 2.0 °C.
That is probably because of better understanding of the role of clouds and aerosols.
<Methods of estimation>
<Using Industrial Age  data>
Climate sensitivity can be estimated using the observed temperature increase, the observed ocean heat uptake, and the modelled or observed radiative forcing.
The data are linked through a simple energybalance model to calculate climate sensitivity.
Radiative forcing is often modelled because Earth observation satellites measuring it has existed during only part of the Industrial Age .
Estimates of climate sensitivity calculated by using these global energy constraints have consistently been lower than those calculated by using other methods, around 2 °C  or lower.Estimates of transient climate response  that have been calculated from models and observational data can be reconciled if it is taken into account that fewer temperature measurements are taken in the polar regions, which warm more quickly than the Earth as a whole.
If only regions for which measurements are available are used in evaluating the model, the differences in TCR estimates are negligible.A very simple climate model could estimate climate sensitivity from Industrial Age data by waiting for the climate system to reach equilibrium and then by measuring the resulting warming, ΔTeq .
Computation of the equilibrium climate sensitivity, S , using the radiative forcing ΔF  and the measured temperature rise, would then be possible.
The radiative forcing resulting from a doubling of CO2, F2
CO2, is relatively well known, at about 3.7 Wm2.
Combining that information results in this equation
times F_Delta F
.However, the climate system is not in equilibrium since the actual warming lags the equilibrium warming, largely because the oceans take up heat and will take centuries or millennia to reach equilibrium.
Estimating climate sensitivity from Industrial Age data requires an adjustment to the equation above.
The actual forcing felt by the atmosphere is the radiative forcing minus the oceans heat uptake, H  and so climate sensitivity can be estimated
The global temperature increase between the beginning of the Industrial Period, which is .
In 2011, the radiative forcing from CO2 and other longlived greenhouse gases  that have been emitted since the 18th century was roughly 2.8 Wm2.
The climate forcing, ΔF, also contains contributions from solar activity , aerosols , ozone , and other smaller influences, which brings the total forcing over the Industrial Period to 2.2 Wm2, according to the best estimate of the IPCC AR5, with substantial uncertainty.
The ocean heat uptake estimated by the IPCC AR5 as 0.42 Wm2, yields a value for S of 1.8 °C .
<Other strategies>
In theory, Industrial Age temperatures could also be used to determine a time scale for the temperature response of the climate system and thus climate sensitivity if the effective heat capacity of the climate system is known, and the timescale is estimated using autocorrelation of the measured temperature, an estimate of climate sensitivity can be derived.
In practice, however, the simultaneous determination of the time scale and heat capacity is difficult.Attempts have been made to use the 11year solar cycle to constrain the transient climate response.
Solar irradiance is about 0.9 Wm2 higher during a solar maximum than during a solar minimum, and those effect can be observed in measured average global temperatures from 1959 to 2004.
Unfortunately, the solar minima in the period coincided with volcanic eruptions, which have a cooling effect on the global temperature.
Because the eruptions caused a larger and less wellquantified decrease in radiative forcing than the reduced solar irradiance, it is questionable whether useful quantitative conclusions can be derived from the observed temperature variations.Observations of volcanic eruptions have also been used to try to estimate climate sensitivity, but as the aerosols from a single eruption last at most a couple of years in the atmosphere, the climate system can never come close to equilibrium, and there is less cooling than there would be if the aerosols stayed in the atmosphere for longer.
Therefore, volcanic eruptions give information only about a lower bound on transient climate sensitivity.
<Using data from Earths past>
Historical climate sensitivity can be estimated by using reconstructions of Earths past temperatures and CO2 levels.
Paleoclimatologists have studied different geological periods, such as the warm Pliocene  and the colder Pleistocene , and sought periods that are in some way analogous to or informative about current climate change.
Climates further back in Earths history are more difficult to study because fewer data are available about them.
For instance, past CO2 concentrations can be derived from air trapped in ice cores, but as of 2020, the oldest continuous ice core is less than one million years old.
Recent periods, such as the Last Glacial Maximum   and the MidHolocene , are often studied, especially when more information about them becomes available.A 2007 estimate of sensitivity made using data from the most recent 420 million years is consistent with sensitivities of current climate models and with other determinations.
The PaleoceneEocene Thermal Maximum , a 20,000year period during which massive amount of carbon entered the atmosphere and average global temperatures increased by approximately 6 °C , also provides a good opportunity to study the climate system when it was in a warm state.
Studies of the last 800,000 years have concluded that climate sensitivity was greater in glacial periods than in interglacial periods.As the name suggests, the Last Glacial Maximum was much colder than today, and good data on atmospheric CO2 concentrations and radiative forcing from that period are available.
The periods orbital forcing was different from todays but had little effect on mean annual temperatures.
Estimating climate sensitivity from the Last Glacial Maximum can be done by several different ways.
One way is to use estimates of global radiative forcing and temperature directly.
The set of feedback mechanisms active during the period, however, may be different from the feedbacks caused by a present doubling of CO2, which introduces additional uncertainty.
In a different approach, a model of intermediate complexity is used to simulate conditions during the period.
Several versions of this single model are run, with different values chosen for uncertain parameters, such that each version has a different ECS.
Outcomes that best simulate the LGMs observed cooling probably produce the most realistic ECS values.
<Using climate models>
Climate models simulate the CO2driven warming of the future as well as the past.
They operate on principles similar to those underlying models that predict the weather, but they focus on longerterm processes.
Climate models typically begin with a starting state and then apply physical laws and knowledge about biology to generate subsequent states.
As with weather modelling, no computer has the power to model the complexity of the entire planet and so simplifications are used to reduce that complexity to something manageable.
An important simplification divides Earths atmosphere into model cells.
For instance, the atmosphere might be divided into cubes of air ten or one hundred kilometers on a side.
Each model cell is treated as if it were homogeneous.
Calculations for model cells are much faster than trying to simulate each molecule of air separately.A lower model resolution  takes less computing power but cannot simulate the atmosphere in as much detail.
A model cannot simulate processes smaller than the model cells or shorterterm than a single time step.
The effects of the smallerscale and shorterterm processes must therefore be estimated by using other methods.
Physical laws contained in the models may also be simplified to speed up calculations.
The biosphere must be included in climate models.
The effects of the biosphere are estimated by using data on the average behaviour of the average plant assemblage of an area under the modelled conditions.
Climate sensitivity is therefore an emergent property of these models.
It is not prescribed, but it follows from the interaction of all the modelled processes.To estimate climate sensitivity, a model is run by using a variety of radiative forcings  and the temperature results are compared to the forcing applied.
Different models give different estimates of climate sensitivity, but they tend to fall within a similar range, as described above.
<Testing, comparisons, and estimates>
Modelling of the climate system can lead to a wide range of outcomes.
Models are often run that use different plausible parameters in their approximation of physical laws and the behaviour of the biosphere, which forms a perturbed physics ensemble, which attempts to model the sensitivity of the climate to different types and amounts of change in each parameter.
Alternatively, structurallydifferent models developed at different institutions are put together, creating an ensemble.
By selecting only the simulations that can simulate some part of the historical climate well, a constrained estimate of climate sensitivity can be made.
One strategy for obtaining more accurate results is placing more emphasis on climate models that perform well in general.A model is tested using observations, paleoclimate data, or both to see if it replicates them accurately.
If it does not, inaccuracies in the physical model and parametrizations are sought, and the model is modified.
For models used to estimate climate sensitivity, specific test metrics that are directly and physically linked to climate sensitivity are sought.
Examples of such metrics are the global patterns of warming, the ability of a model to reproduce observed relative humidity in the tropics and subtropics, patterns of heat radiation, and the variability of temperature around longterm historical warming.
Ensemble climate models developed at different institutions tend to produce constrained estimates of ECS that are slightly higher than 3 °C .
The models with ECS slightly above 3 °C  simulate the above situations better than models with a lower climate sensitivity.Many projects and groups exist to compare and to analyse the results of multiple models.
For instance, the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project  has been running since the 1990s.In preparation for the 2021 IPCC Sixth Assessment Report, a new generation of climate models have been developed by scientific groups around the world.
The average estimated climate sensitivity has increased in Coupled Model Intercomparison Project 
Phase 6  compared to the previous generation, with values spanning 1.8 to 5.6 °C  across 27 global climate models and exceeding 4.5 °C  in 10 of them.
The cause of the increased ECS lies mainly in improved modelling of clouds.
Temperature rises are now believed to cause sharper decreases in the number of low clouds, and fewer low clouds means more sunlight is absorbed by the planet and less reflected to space.
Models with the highest ECS values, however, are not consistent with observed warming.

<climate change feedback>
Climate change feedbacks are important in the understanding of global warming because feedback processes amplify or diminish the effect of each climate forcing, and so play an important part in determining the climate sensitivity and future climate state.
Feedback in general is the process in which changing one quantity changes a second quantity, and the change in the second quantity in turn changes the first.
Positive  feedback amplifies the change in the first quantity while negative  feedback reduces it.The term forcing means a change which may push the climate system in the direction of warming or cooling.
An example of a climate forcing is increased atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases.
By definition, forcings are external to the climate system while feedbacks are internal in essence, feedbacks represent the internal processes of the system.
Some feedbacks may act in relative isolation to the rest of the climate system others may be tightly coupled hence it may be difficult to tell just how much a particular process contributes.Forcings and feedbacks together determine how much and how fast the climate changes.
The main positive feedback in global warming is the tendency of warming to increase the amount of water vapor in the atmosphere, which in turn leads to further warming.
The main cooling response comes from the StefanBoltzmann law, the amount of heat radiated from the Earth into space changes with the fourth power of the temperature of Earths surface and atmosphere.
It is typically not considered a feedback.
Observations and modelling studies indicate that there is a net positive feedback to warming.
Large positive feedbacks can lead to tipping pointsabrupt or irreversible changes in the climate systemdepending upon the rate and magnitude of the climate change.
<Positive>
<Carbon cycle feedbacks>
There have been predictions, and some evidence, that global warming might cause loss of carbon from terrestrial ecosystems, leading to an increase of atmospheric CO2 levels.
Several climate models indicate that global warming through the 21st century could be accelerated by the response of the terrestrial carbon cycle to such warming.
All 11 models in the C4MIP study found that a larger fraction of anthropogenic CO2 will stay airborne if climate change is accounted for.
By the end of the twentyfirst century, this additional CO2 varied between 20 and 200 ppm for the two extreme models, the majority of the models lying between 50 and 100 ppm.
The higher CO2 levels led to an additional climate warming ranging between 0.1° and 1.5 °C.
However, there was still a large uncertainty on the magnitude of these sensitivities.
Eight models attributed most of the changes to the land, while three attributed it to the ocean.
The strongest feedbacks in these cases are due to increased respiration of carbon from soils throughout the high latitude boreal forests of the Northern Hemisphere.
One model in particular  indicates a secondary carbon cycle feedback due to the loss of much of the Amazon Rainforest in response to significantly reduced precipitation over tropical South America.
While models disagree on the strength of any terrestrial carbon cycle feedback, they each suggest any such feedback would accelerate global warming.
Observations show that soils in the U.K have been losing carbon at the rate of four million tonnes a year for the past 25 years according to a paper in Nature by Bellamy et al.
in September 2005, who note that these results are unlikely to be explained by land use changes.
Results such as this rely on a dense sampling network and thus are not available on a global scale.
Extrapolating to all of the United Kingdom, they estimate annual losses of 13 million tons per year.
This is as much as the annual reductions in carbon dioxide emissions achieved by the UK under the Kyoto Treaty .It has also been suggested  that the release of dissolved organic carbon  from peat bogs into water courses  constitutes a positive feedback for global warming.
The carbon currently stored in peatlands  is over half the amount of carbon already in the atmosphere.
DOC levels in water courses are observably rising Freemans hypothesis is that, not elevated temperatures, but elevated levels of atmospheric CO2 are responsible, through stimulation of primary productivity.Tree deaths are believed to be increasing as a result of climate change, which is a positive feedback effect.
Wetlands and freshwater ecosystems are predicted to be the largest potential contributor to a global methane climate feedback.
Longterm warming changes the balance in the methanerelated microbial community within freshwater ecosystems so they produce more methane while proportionately less is oxidised to carbon dioxide.
<Arctic methane release>
Warming is also the triggering variable for the release of carbon  in the arctic.
Methane released from thawing permafrost such as the frozen peat bogs in Siberia, and from methane clathrate on the sea floor, creates a positive feedback.
In April 2019, Turetsky et al.
reported permafrost was thawing quicker than predicted.
Recently the understanding of the climate feedback from permafrost improved, but potential emissions from the subsea permafrost remain unknown and are  like many other soil carbon feedbacks  still absent from most climate models.
<Thawing permafrost peat bogs>
Western Siberia is the worlds largest peat bog, a one million square kilometer region of permafrost peat bog that was formed 11,000 years ago at the end of the last ice age.
The melting of its permafrost is likely to lead to the release, over decades, of large quantities of methane.
As much as 70,000 million tonnes of methane, an extremely effective greenhouse gas, might be released over the next few decades, creating an additional source of greenhouse gas emissions.
Similar melting has been observed in eastern Siberia.
Lawrence et al.  suggest that a rapid melting of Arctic sea ice may start a feedback loop that rapidly melts Arctic permafrost, triggering further warming.
May 31, 2010.
NASA published that globally Greenhouse gases are escaping the permafrost and entering the atmosphere at an increasing rate  up to 50 billion tons each year of methane, for example  due to a global thawing trend.
This is particularly troublesome because methane heats the atmosphere with 25 times the efficiency of carbon dioxide .In 2019, a report called  Arctic report card  estimated the current greenhouse gas emissions from Arctic permafrost as almost equal to the emissions of Russia or Japan or less than 10 of the global emissions from fossil fuels.The Sixth IPCC Assessment Report states that projections from models of permafrost ecosystems suggest that future permafrost thaw will lead to some additional warming  enough to be important, but not enough to lead to a runaway warming situation, where permafrost thaw leads to a dramatic, selfreinforcing acceleration of global warming.
<Hydrates>
Methane clathrate, also called methane hydrate, is a form of water ice that contains a large amount of methane within its crystal structure.
Extremely large deposits of methane clathrate have been found under sediments on the sea and ocean floors of Earth.
The sudden release of large amounts of natural gas from methane clathrate deposits, in a runaway global warming event, has been hypothesized as a cause of past and possibly future climate changes.
The release of this trapped methane is a potential major outcome of a rise in temperature it is thought that this might increase the global temperature by an additional 5° in itself, as methane is much more powerful as a greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide.
The theory also predicts this will greatly affect available oxygen content of the atmosphere.
This theory has been proposed to explain the most severe mass extinction event on earth known as the PermianTriassic extinction event, and also the PaleoceneEocene Thermal Maximum climate change event.
In 2008, a research expedition for the American Geophysical Union detected levels of methane up to 100 times above normal in the Siberian Arctic, likely being released by methane clathrates being released by holes in a frozen lid of seabed permafrost, around the outfall of the Lena River and the area between the Laptev Sea and East Siberian Sea.In 2020, the first leak of methane from the sea floor in Antarctica was discovered.
The scientists are not sure what caused it.
The area where it was found had not warmed yet significantly.
It is on the side of a volcano, but it seems that it is not from there.
The methane  eating microbes, eat the methane much fewer that was supposed, and the researchers think this should be included in climate models.
They also claim that there is much more to discover about the issue in Antarctica.
A quarter of all marine methane is found in the region of Antarctica
<Abrupt increases in atmospheric methane>
Literature assessments by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  and the US Climate Change Science Program  have considered the possibility of future projected climate change leading to a rapid increase in atmospheric methane.
The IPCC Third Assessment Report, published in 2001, looked at possible rapid increases in methane due either to reductions in the atmospheric chemical sink or from the release of buried methane reservoirs.
In both cases, it was judged that such a release would be exceptionally unlikely
The CCSP assessment, published in 2008, concluded that an abrupt release of methane into the atmosphere appeared very unlikely
The CCSP assessment, however, noted that climate change would very likely  accelerate the pace of persistent emissions from both hydrate sources and wetlands.On 10 June 2019 Louise M.
Farquharson and her team reported that their 12year study into Canadian permafrost had Observed maximum thaw depths at our sites are already exceeding those projected to occur by 2090.
Between 1990 and 2016, an increase of up to 4 °C has been observed in terrestrial permafrost and this trend is expected to continue as Arctic mean annual air temperatures increase at a rate twice that of lower latitudes.
Determining the extent of new thermokarst development is difficult, but there is little doubt the problem is widespread.
Farquharson and her team guess that about 231,000 square miles  of permafrost, or about 5.5 of the zone that is permafrost yearround, is vulnerable to rapid surface thawing.
<Decomposition>
Organic matter stored in permafrost generates heat as it decomposes in response to the permafrost melting.
As the tropics get wetter, as many climate models predict, soils are likely to experience greater rates of respiration and decomposition, limiting the carbon storage abilities of tropical soils.
<Peat decomposition>
Peat, occurring naturally in peat bogs, is a store of carbon significant on a global scale.
When peat dries it decomposes, and may additionally burn.  Water table adjustment due to global warming may cause significant excursions of carbon from peat bogs.  This may be released as methane, which can exacerbate the feedback effect, due to its high global warming potential.
<Rainforest drying>
Rainforests, most notably tropical rainforests, are particularly vulnerable to global warming.  There are a number of effects which may occur, but two are particularly concerning.  Firstly, the drier vegetation may cause total collapse of the rainforest ecosystem.  For example, the Amazon rainforest would tend to be replaced by caatinga ecosystems.  Further, even tropical rainforests ecosystems which do not collapse entirely may lose significant proportions of their stored carbon as a result of drying, due to changes in vegetation.
<Forest fires>
The IPCC Fourth Assessment Report predicts that many midlatitude regions, such as Mediterranean Europe, will experience decreased rainfall and an increased risk of drought, which in turn would allow forest fires to occur on larger scale, and more regularly.
This releases more stored carbon into the atmosphere than the carbon cycle can naturally reabsorb, as well as reducing the overall forest area on the planet, creating a positive feedback loop.
Part of that feedback loop is more rapid growth of replacement forests and a northward migration of forests as northern latitudes become more suitable climates for sustaining forests.
There is a question of whether the burning of renewable fuels such as forests should be counted as contributing to global warming.  Cook  Vizy also found that forest fires were likely in the Amazon Rainforest, eventually resulting in a transition to Caatinga vegetation in the Eastern Amazon region.
<Desertification>
Desertification is a consequence of global warming in some environments.  Desert soils contain little humus, and support little vegetation.  As a result, transition to desert ecosystems is typically associated with excursions of carbon.
<Modelling results>
The global warming projections contained in the IPCCs Fourth Assessment Report  include carbon cycle feedbacks.
Authors of AR4, however, noted that scientific understanding of carbon cycle feedbacks was poor.
Projections in AR4 were based on a range of greenhouse gas emissions scenarios, and suggested warming between the late 20th and late 21st century of 1.1 to 6.4 °C.
This is the likely range , based on the expert judgement of the IPCCs authors.
Authors noted that the lower end of the likely range appeared to be better constrained than the upper end of the likely range, in part due to carbon cycle feedbacks.
The American Meteorological Society has commented that more research is needed to model the effects of carbon cycle feedbacks in climate change projections.Isaken et al.  considered how future methane release from the Arctic might contribute to global warming.
Their study suggested that if global methane emissions were to increase by a factor of 2.5 to 5.2 above  current emissions, the indirect contribution to radiative forcing would be about 250 and 400 respectively, of the forcing that can be directly attributed to methane.
This amplification of methane warming is due to projected changes in atmospheric chemistry.
Schaefer et al.  considered how carbon released from permafrost might contribute to global warming.
Their study projected changes in permafrost based on a medium greenhouse gas emissions scenario .
According to the study, by 2200, the permafrost feedback might contribute 190  gigatons of carbon cumulatively to the atmosphere.
Schaefer et al.  commented that this estimate may be low.
<Implications for climate policy>
Uncertainty over climate change feedbacks has implications for climate policy.
For instance, uncertainty over carbon cycle feedbacks may affect targets for reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
Emissions targets are often based on a target stabilization level of atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations, or on a target for limiting global warming to a particular magnitude.
Both of these targets  require an understanding of future changes in the carbon cycle.
If models incorrectly project future changes in the carbon cycle, then concentration or temperature targets could be missed.
For example, if models underestimate the amount of carbon released into the atmosphere due to positive feedbacks , then they may also underestimate the extent of emissions reductions necessary to meet a concentration or temperature target.
<Cloud feedback>
Warming is expected to change the distribution and type of clouds.
Seen from below, clouds emit infrared radiation back to the surface, and so exert a warming effect seen from above, clouds reflect sunlight and emit infrared radiation to space, and so exert a cooling effect.
Whether the net effect is warming or cooling depends on details such as the type and altitude of the cloud.
Low clouds tend to trap more heat at the surface and therefore have a positive feedback, while high clouds normally reflect more sunlight from the top so they have a negative feedback.
These details were poorly observed before the advent of satellite data and are difficult to represent in climate models.
Global climate models were showing a nearzero to moderately strong positive net cloud feedback, but the effective climate sensitivity has increased substantially in the latest generation of global climate models.
Differences in the physical representation of clouds in models drive this enhanced climate sensitivity relative to the previous generation of models.A 2019 simulation predicts that if greenhouse gases reach three times the current level of atmospheric carbon dioxide that stratocumulus clouds could abruptly disperse, contributing to additional global warming.
<Gas release>
Release of gases of biological origin may be affected by global warming, but research into such effects is at an early stage.
Some of these gases, such as nitrous oxide released from peat or thawing permafrost, directly affect climate.
Others, such as dimethyl sulfide released from oceans, have indirect effects.
<Icealbedo feedback>
When ice melts, land or open water takes its place.
Both land and open water are on average less reflective than ice and thus absorb more solar radiation.
This causes more warming, which in turn causes more melting, and this cycle continues.  During times of global cooling, additional ice increases the reflectivity, which reduces the absorption of solar radiation, resulting in more cooling through a continuing cycle.  This is considered a faster feedback mechanism.
Albedo change is also the main reason why IPCC predict polar temperatures in the northern hemisphere to rise up to twice as much as those of the rest of the world, in a process known as polar amplification.
In September 2007, the Arctic sea ice area reached about half the size of the average summer minimum area between 1979 and 2000.
Also in September 2007, Arctic sea ice retreated far enough for the Northwest Passage to become navigable to shipping for the first time in recorded history.
The record losses of 2007 and 2008 may, however, be temporary.
Mark Serreze of the US National Snow and Ice Data Center views 2030 as a reasonable estimate for when the summertime Arctic ice cap might be icefree.
The polar amplification of global warming is not predicted to occur in the southern hemisphere.
The Antarctic sea ice reached its greatest extent on record since the beginning of observation in 1979, but the gain in ice in the south is exceeded by the loss in the north.
The trend for global sea ice, northern hemisphere and southern hemisphere combined is clearly a decline.Ice loss may have internal feedback processes, as melting of ice over land can cause eustatic sea level rise, potentially causing instability of ice shelves and inundating coastal ice masses, such as glacier tongues.  Further, a potential feedback cycle exists due to earthquakes caused by isostatic rebound further destabilising ice shelves, glaciers and ice caps.
The icealbedo in some subarctic forests is also changing, as stands of larch  are being replaced by spruce trees .
<Water vapor feedback>
If the atmospheres are warmed, the saturation vapor pressure increases, and the amount of water vapor in the atmosphere will tend to increase.
Since water vapor is a greenhouse gas, the increase in water vapor content makes the atmosphere warm further this warming causes the atmosphere to hold still more water vapor , and so on until other processes stop the feedback loop.
The result is a much larger greenhouse effect than that due to CO2 alone.
Although this feedback process causes an increase in the absolute moisture content of the air, the relative humidity stays nearly constant or even decreases slightly because the air is warmer.  Climate models incorporate this feedback.
Water vapor feedback is strongly positive, with most evidence supporting a magnitude of 1.5 to 2.0 Wm2K, sufficient  to roughly double the warming that would otherwise occur.
Water vapor feedback is considered a faster feedback mechanism.
<Oceanwarming feedback>
According to the U.S.
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Ocean warming provides a good example of a potential positive feedback mechanism.
The oceans are an important sink for CO2 through absorption of the gas into the water surface.
As CO2 increases, it increases the warming potential of the atmosphere.
If air temperatures warm, it should warm the oceans.
The ability of the ocean to remove CO2 from the atmosphere decreases with increasing temperature.
Because of this, increasing CO2 in the atmosphere could have effects that actually intensify the increase in CO2 in the atmosphere.
<Negative>
<Blackbody radiation>
As the temperature of a black body increases, the emission of infrared radiation back into space increases with the fourth power of its absolute temperature according to StefanBoltzmann law.
This increases the amount of outgoing radiation as the Earth warms.
It is called the Planck response, and sometimes considered a negative feedback .
<Carbon cycle>
<Le Chateliers principle>
Following Le Chateliers principle, the chemical equilibrium of the Earths carbon cycle will shift in response to anthropogenic CO2 emissions.
The primary driver of this is the ocean, which absorbs anthropogenic CO2 via the socalled solubility pump.
At present this accounts for only about one third of the current emissions, but ultimately most  of the CO2 emitted by human activities will dissolve in the ocean over a period of centuries A better approximation of the lifetime of fossil fuel CO2 for public discussion might be 300 years, plus 25 that lasts forever.
However, the rate at which the ocean will take it up in the future is less certain, and will be affected by stratification induced by warming and, potentially, changes in the oceans thermohaline circulation.
<Chemical weathering>
Chemical weathering over the geological long term acts to remove CO2 from the atmosphere.
With current global warming, weathering is increasing, demonstrating significant feedbacks between climate and Earth surface.
Biosequestration also captures and stores CO2 by biological processes.  The formation of shells by organisms in the ocean, over a very long time, removes CO2 from the oceans.  The complete conversion of CO2 to limestone takes thousands to hundreds of thousands of years.
<Net primary productivity>
Net primary productivity changes in response to increased CO2, as plants photosynthesis increased in response to increasing concentrations.  However, this effect is swamped by other changes in the biosphere due to global warming.The climate changeexacerbated 2019 to 2020 Australian wildfires caused oceanic deposition of wildfire aerosols, enhancing marine productivity and thereby caused widespread phytoplankton blooms.
While these increased oceanic carbon dioxide uptake, the amount likely pales in comparison to the 715 million tons of CO2 the fires emitted and can contribute to ocean acidification which, in turn, may induce toxic algal blooms but is thought to generally closely follow future atmospheric CO2 concentrations as climate change feedbacks on ocean pH approximately cancel.
<Lapse rate>
The atmospheres temperature decreases with height in the troposphere.
Since emission of infrared radiation varies with temperature, longwave radiation escaping to space from the relatively cold upper atmosphere is less than that emitted toward the ground from the lower atmosphere.
Thus, the strength of the greenhouse effect depends on the atmospheres rate of temperature decrease with height.
Both theory and climate models indicate that global warming will reduce the rate of temperature decrease with height, producing a negative lapse rate feedback that weakens the greenhouse effect.
However, in regions with strong inversions, such as the polar regions, the lapse rate feedback can be positive because the surface warms faster than higher altitudes, resulting in inefficient longwave cooling.
Measurements of the rate of temperature change with height are very sensitive to small errors in observations, making it difficult to establish whether the models agree with observations.
<Impacts on humans>
The primary human input to global climate change is increasing anthropogenic atmospheric carbon dioxide, which causes a complicated system of positive and negative drivers that ultimatelythrough such factors as heat stress, floods, droughts, and emerging diseases have a negative effect on human population.

<heatwave>
A heat wave, or heatwave, or extreme heat, is a period of excessively hot weather, which may be accompanied by high humidity, especially in oceanic climate countries.  While definitions vary, a heat wave is usually measured relative to the usual climate in the area and relative to normal temperatures for the season.
Temperatures that people from a hotter climate consider normal can be called a heat wave in a cooler area if they are outside the normal climate pattern for that area.The term is applied both to hot weather variations and to extraordinary spells of hot weather which may occur only once a century.
Severe heat waves have caused catastrophic crop failures, thousands of deaths from hyperthermia, increased risk of wildfires in areas with drought, and widespread power outages due to increased use of air conditioning.
A heat wave is considered extreme weather, and poses danger to human health because heat and sunlight overwhelm the human bodys cooling system.  Heat waves can usually be detected using forecasting instruments so that a warning can be issued.  
Heatwaves often have complex effects on human economies, due to less productivity of workers, disruption of agricultural and industrial processes and damage to infrastructure not adapted for extreme heat.Heatwaves have become more frequent, and over land more intense, almost everywhere since the 1950s, due to climate change.
<Definitions>
There are several quite similar definitions of heat waves
The IPCC defines heat wave as a period of abnormally hot weather, often defined with reference to a relative temperature threshold, lasting from two days to months.
2911 
A definition based on the Heat Wave Duration Index is that a heat wave occurs when the daily maximum temperature of more than five consecutive days exceeds the average maximum temperature by 5 °C , the normal period being 1961 to 1990.
The same definition is used by the World Meteorological Organization.
A definition from the Glossary of Meteorology is A period of abnormally and uncomfortably hot and usually humid weather.
<Definitions by country>
<Europe>
In the Netherlands, a heat wave is defined as a period of at least five consecutive days in which the maximum temperature in De Bilt exceeds 25 °C , provided that on at least three days in this period the maximum temperature in De Bilt exceeds 30 °C .
This definition of a heat wave is also used in Belgium  and Luxembourg.
In Denmark, a national heat wave  is defined as a period of at least 3 consecutive days of which period the average maximum temperature across more than fifty percent of the country exceeds 28 °C   the Danish Meteorological Institute further defines a warmth wave  when the same criteria are met for a 25 °C  temperature, while in Sweden, a heat wave is defined as at least five days in a row with a daily high exceeding 25 °C .In Greece, according to the Hellenic National Metereological Service, a heat wave is defined as three consecutive days at or above 39 °C  and a minimum temperature in the same period at or over 26 °C , with no winds or with weak winds, and the above conditions being observed in a broad area.
In the United Kingdom, the Met Office operates a Heat Health Watch system which places each Local Authority region into one of four levels.
Heatwave conditions are defined by the maximum daytime temperature and minimum nighttime temperature rising above the threshold for a particular region.
The length of time spent above that threshold determines the particular level.
Level 1 is normal summer conditions.
Level 2 is reached when there is a 60 or higher risk that the temperature will be above the threshold levels for two days and the intervening night.
Level 3 is triggered when the temperature has been above the threshold for the preceding day and night, and there is a 90 or higher chance that it will stay above the threshold in the following day.
Level 4 is triggered if conditions are more severe than those of the preceding three levels.  Each of the first three levels is associated with a particular state of readiness and response by the social and health services, and Level 4 is associated with more widespread response.
<Other regions>
In the United States, definitions also vary by region, usually meaning a period of at least two or more days of excessively hot weather.
In the Northeast, a heat wave is typically defined as three consecutive days where the temperature reaches or exceeds 90 °F , but not always as this ties in with humidity levels to determine a heat index threshold.
The same does not apply to drier climates.
A heat storm is a Californian term for an extended heat wave.
Heat storms occur when the temperature reaches 100 °F  for three or more consecutive days over a wide area .
The National Weather Service issues heat advisories and excessive heat warnings when unusual periods of hot weather are expected.
In Adelaide, South Australia, a heat wave is defined as five consecutive days at or above 35 °C , or three consecutive days at or over 40 °C .
The Australian Bureau of Meteorology defines a heat wave as three days or more of maximum and minimum temperatures that are unusual for the location.
Until the introduction of this new Pilot Heatwave Forecast there was no national definition that described heatwave or measures of heatwave severity.
<Observations>
A general indicator that allows comparing heat waves in different regions of the World, characterized by different climates, was published in 2015.
This was used to estimate heat waves occurrence at the global scale from 1901 to 2010, finding a substantial and sharp increase in the number of affected areas in the last two decades.June 2019 was the hottest month on record worldwide, the effects of this were especially prominent in Europe.
Increased wildfires in places such as Spain can also be attributed to heat waves.The 2021 Western North America heat wave resulted in some of the highest temperatures ever recorded in the region, including 49.6 °C , the highest temperature ever measured in Canada.A study that investigated 13,115 cities found that extreme heat exposure of a wet bulb globe temperature above 30 °C tripled between 1983 and 2016.
It increased by 50 when the population growth in these cities is not taken into account.
Urban areas and living spaces are often significantly warmer than surrounding rural areas, partly due to the urban heat island effect.
The researchers compiled a comprehensive inventory of past urban extreme heat events.
<Causes>
Heat waves form when high pressure aloft  strengthens and remains over a region for several days up to several weeks.
This is common in summer  as the jet stream follows the sun.
On the equator side of the jet stream, in the upper layers of the atmosphere, is the high pressure area.
Summertime weather patterns are generally slower to change than in winter.
As a result, this upper level high pressure also moves slowly.
Under high pressure, the air subsides  toward the surface, warming and drying adiabatically, inhibiting convection and preventing the formation of clouds.
Reduction of clouds increases shortwave radiation reaching the surface.
A low pressure at the surface leads to surface wind from lower latitudes that brings warm air, enhancing the warming.
Alternatively, the surface winds could blow from the hot continental interior towards the coastal zone, leading to heat waves there, or from a high elevation towards low elevation, enhancing the subsidence and therefore the adiabatic warming.In the Eastern United States a heat wave can occur when a high pressure system originating in the Gulf of Mexico becomes stationary just off the Atlantic Seaboard .
Hot humid air masses form over the Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean Sea while hot dry air masses form over the desert Southwest and northern Mexico.
The SW winds on the back side of the High continue to pump hot, humid Gulf air northeastward resulting in a spell of hot and humid weather for much of the Eastern States.In the Western Cape Province of South Africa, a heat wave can occur when a low pressure offshore and high pressure inland air combine to form a Bergwind.
The air warms as it descends from the Karoo interior, and the temperature will rise about 10 °C from the interior to the coast.
Humidities are usually very low, and the temperatures can be over 40 °C in summer.
The highest official temperatures recorded in South Africa  was recorded one summer during a bergwind occurring along the Eastern Cape coastline.The role of soil moisture can also contribute to the intensification of heat waves in Europe.
Low soil moisture leads to a number of complex feedback mechanisms, which can in turn result in increased surface temperatures.
One of the main mechanisms is reduced evaporative cooling of the atmosphere.
When water evaporates, it consumes energy and thus will lower the surrounding temperature.
If the soil is very dry, then incoming radiation from the sun will warm the air with little or no cooling effect from moisture evaporating from the soil.
<Climate change>
<Impacts on human health>
<Heatrelated health impacts for vulnerable people>
<Mortality>
<Underreporting of fatalities>
The number of heat fatalities is likely highly underreported due to a lack of reports and misreports.
When factoring in heatrelated illnesses, actual death tolls linked to extreme heat may be six times as high as official figures, as suggested for California and Japan.Part of the mortality observed during a heat wave can be attributed to shortterm forward mortality displacement.
It has been observed that for some heat waves, there is a compensatory decrease in overall mortality during the subsequent weeks after a heat wave.
Such compensatory reductions in mortality suggest that heat affects especially those so ill that they would have died in the short term anyway.Another explanation for underreporting is the social attenuation in most contexts of heat waves as a health risk.
As shown by the deadly French heat wave in 2003, heat wave dangers result from the intricate association of natural and social factors.
Social invisibility is one such factor.
In places where heatrelated deaths often occur indoors, among elderly people living alone, it can be challenging to assign heat as a contributing factor.
<Heat index for temperature and relative humidity>
The heat index  is a measure of how hot it feels when relative humidity is factored with the actual air temperature.
<Psychological and sociological effects>
In addition to physical stress, excessive heat causes psychological stress, to a degree which affects performance, and is also associated with an increase in violent crime.
High temperatures are associated with increased conflict both at the interpersonal level and at the societal level.
In every society, crime rates go up when temperatures go up, particularly violent crimes such as assault, murder, and rape.
Furthermore, in politically unstable countries, high temperatures are an aggravating factor that lead toward civil wars.Additionally, high temperatures have a significant effect on income.
A study of counties in the United States found that economic productivity of individual days declines by about 1.7 for each degree Celsius above 15 °C .
<Surface ozone >
Ozone pollution in urban areas is especially concerning with increasing temperatures, raising heatrelated mortality during heat waves.
During heat waves in urban areas, ground level ozone pollution can be 20 higher than usual. 
One study concluded that from 1860 to 2000, the global populationweighted fine particle concentrations increased by 5 and nearsurface ozone concentrations by 2 due to climate change.An investigation to assess the joint mortality effects of ozone and heat during the European heat waves in 2003, concluded that these appear to be additive.
<Other impacts>
<Reduced GDP>
Calculations from 2022 suggest heatwaves will cause  1 decrease of GDP to economies by mid 21st century.Heatwaves often have complex effects on human economies, due to less productivity of workers, disruption of agricultural and industrial processes and damage to infrastructure not adapted for extreme heat.
<Reduced agricultural yields>
Heat waves significantly threaten agricultural production.
In 2019, heat waves in the Mulanje region of Malawi involved temperatures as high as 40 °C .
This and a late rain season resulted in significant tea leaf scorching and reduced yields.
<Wildfires>
If a heat wave occurs during a drought, which dries out vegetation, it can contribute to bushfires and wildfires.
During the disastrous heat wave that struck Europe in 2003, fires raged through Portugal, destroying over 3,010 square kilometres  or 301,000 hectares  of forest and 440 square kilometres  or 44,000 hectares  of agricultural land and causing an estimated 1 billion worth of damage.
High end farmlands have irrigation systems to back up crops with.
Heat waves cause wildfires.
<Floods>
Heat waves can also contribute to severe flooding.
The recordbreaking heat wave that afflicted Pakistan beginning in May 2022 led to glacier melt and moisture flow, which were factors in the devastating floods that began in June and claimed over 1,100 lives.
<Infrastructural damage>
Heat waves can and do cause roads and highways to buckle and melt, water lines to burst, and power transformers to detonate, causing fires.
Heat waves can also damage rail roads, such as buckling and kinking rails, which can lead to slower traffic, delays, and even cancellations of service when rails are too dangerous to traverse by trains.
<Power outages>
Heat waves often lead to electricity spikes due to increased air conditioning use, which can create power outages, exacerbating the problem.
During the 2006 North American heat wave, thousands of homes and businesses went without power, especially in California.
In Los Angeles, electrical transformers failed, leaving thousands without power for as long as five days.
The 2009 South Eastern Australia Heat Wave caused the city of Melbourne, Australia to experience some major power disruptions which left over half a million people without power as the heat wave blew transformers and overloaded a power grid.
<Options for reducing impacts of heat waves on people>
<Reducing urban heat island effect>
<Using air conditioning and other cooling systems>
One public health measure taken during heat waves is the settingup of airconditioned public cooling centers.
There are novel designs for cooling systems that are relatively lowcost, do not use electrical components, are offgrid and chemically store solar energy for ondemand use.Adding air conditioning in schools provides a cooler work place but results in additional greenhouse gas emissions unless solar energy is used.
<Examples by country>
<United States>
In July 2019, over 50 million people in the United States were present in a jurisdiction with any type of heat advisory.
Scientists predicted that in the days following the issuance of these warnings, many records for highest low temperatures will be broken i.e.
the lowest temperature in a 24hour period will be higher than any low temperature measured before.According to estimates of a 2022 study, 107 million people in the US will experience extremely dangerous heat in the year 2053.Heat waves are the most lethal type of weather phenomenon in the United States.
Between 1992 and 2001, deaths from excessive heat in the United States numbered 2,190, compared with 880 deaths from floods and 150 from hurricanes.
The average annual number of fatalities directly attributed to heat in the United States is about 400.
The 1995 Chicago heat wave, one of the worst in US history, led to approximately 739 heatrelated deaths over a period of 5 days.
In the United States, the loss of human life in hot spells in summer exceeds that caused by all other weather events combined, including lightning, rain, floods, hurricanes, and tornadoes.About 6,200 Americans are hospitalized each summer  due to excessive heat, and those at highest risk are poor, uninsured or elderly.Research in the United States suggests that the relationship between extreme temperature and mortality varies by location.
Heat is more likely to increase the risk of mortality in cities in the northern part of the country than in the southern regions of the country.
For example, when Chicago, Denver, or New York City experience unusually hot summertime temperatures, elevated levels of illness and death are predicted.
In contrast, parts of the country that are mild to hot yearround have a lower public health risk from excessive heat.
Research shows that residents of southern cities, such as Miami, Tampa, Los Angeles, and Phoenix, tend to be acclimated to hot weather conditions and therefore less vulnerable to heat related deaths.
However, as a whole, people in the United States appear to be adapting to hotter temperatures further north each decade, although this might be due to better infrastructure, more modern building design, and better public awareness.
<Society and culture>
Policy makers, funders and researchers have created the Extreme Heat Resilience Alliance coalition under the Atlantic Council to advocate for naming heatwaves, measuring them, and ranking them to build better awareness of their impacts.

<global surface temperature>
In earth science, global surface temperature  is calculated by averaging the temperature at the surface of the sea and air temperature over land.
In technical writing, scientists call longterm changes in GST global cooling or global warming.
Periods of both have happened regularly throughout earths history.
The reliable measurement of the global temperature started in 1880.
Between that year and 1940 the average annual temperature increased by 0.2 °C.
The temperature was then stable between 1940 and 1970.
Since 1970, it has increased by 0.18 °C each decade.
The average global temperature has increased by 0.9 °C  compared to the baseline temperature which is about 14 °C.
Although a pause has been observed between 1998 and 2013, the global warming continues since at the same pace as before.
Scientists point out that in the earths 4.6 billion years of history, sea levels have risen and fallen sharply.
However, recent global sea level rise rate has deviated from the average rate of the past two to three thousand years, and is rising at a rate of onetenth of an inch per year.
The continuation or acceleration of this trend will cause significant changes in the worlds coastlines.
<Background>
In the 1860s, physicist John Tyndall recognized the Earths natural greenhouse effect and suggested that slight changes in the atmospheric composition could bring about climatic variations.
In 1896, a seminal paper by Swedish scientist Svante Arrhenius first predicted that changes in the levels of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere could substantially alter the surface temperature through the greenhouse effect.Changes in global temperatures over the past century provide evidence for the effects of increasing greenhouse gasses.
When the climate system reacts to such changes, climate change follows.
Measurement of the GST is one of the many lines of evidence supporting the scientific consensus on climate change, which is that humans are causing warming of Earths climate system.
<Warming oceans>
With the Earths temperature increasing, the ocean has absorbed much of this increased heat, with the top 700 meters of ocean showing warming of 0.22 C  since 1969.
Expansion of the warm water, along with melting ice sheets, causes the sea level to rise.
The distribution of excess heat in the ocean is uneven, with the greatest ocean warming occurring in the southern hemisphere and contributing to the underground melting of the Antarctic ice shelf.
The warming of sea water is also related to the thinning of ice shelves and sea ice, both of which have a further impact on the Earths climate system.
Finally, sea warming threatens marine ecosystems and human livelihoods.
For example, warm water endangers the health of corals, which in turn endangers marine communities that depend on corals for shelter and food.
Ultimately, people who rely on marine fisheries for their livelihoods and jobs may face the negative effects of ocean warming.
During the 20th century, the sea surface temperature increased for a century and continued to rise.
From 1901 to 2015, the temperature increased by an average of 0.13 °F per decade.
Since reliable observations began in 1880, the sea surface temperature has been higher than at any other time in the past three decades.
As greenhouse gases absorb more energy from the sun, the ocean absorbs more heat, leading to rising sea surface temperatures and rising sea levels.
Changes in ocean temperature and ocean currents brought about by climate change will lead to changes in the global climate pattern.
For example, warmer waters may promote the development of stronger storms in the tropics, which may cause property loss and loss of life.
Impacts related to sea level rise and severe storms are particularly relevant to coastal communities.
<Shrinking ice sheets>
The Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets have decreased exponentially in mass.
According to NASAs Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment, it shows that Greenland has lost an average of 286 billion tons of ice per year.  The expansion of the warm water and the melting ice sheets cause the sea level to rise.
The ice is changing everywhere on earth.
Since 1912, the famous snow of Mount Kilimanjaro has melted more than 80.
The glaciers in the Garhwal Himalayas in India are retreating so fast that researchers believe that by 2035, most of the central and eastern Himalayas will actually disappear.
For half a century, its range has dropped by about 10 in the past 30 years.
NASA repeated laser altimeter readings showed that the edge of the Greenland ice sheet was shrinking.
Now, the spring freshwater ice in the northern hemisphere breaks 9 days earlier than 150 years ago, while the autumn freeze is 10 days later.
The melting of frozen ground caused land subsidence in parts of Alaska to exceed 15 feet .
From the Arctic to Peru, from Switzerland to the equatorial glacier in Manjaya, Indonesia, massive ice fields, monstrous glaciers, and sea ice are disappearing, fast.When the temperature rises and the ice melts, more water flows into the ocean from glaciers and ice caps, and the sea water warms and expands in volume.
According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , this combined effect has played a major role in raising the global average sea level by 4 to 8 inches  in the past 100 years.
Greenlands meltwater may greatly affect the flow of huge ocean currents, which are called the Atlantic Meridian Overturning Circulation or AMOC.
Similar to a huge conveyor belt, AMOC helps transport hot water from tropical regions to the Arctic.
Its important role in the global distribution of heat also makes it have a significant impact on global weather conditionsAMOCs hot water flow is largely due to the mild climate in places such as Western Europe.
As fresh water pours into the ocean from the melting Greenland ice sheet, this may slow down the flow of water.
At the same time, studies have shown that melting ice from Antarctica may disrupt the structure of the Southern Ocean.
Because the density of fresh water is lower than that of salt water, a large amount of melt water may not be able to merge with the rest of the ocean, but form a layer of material attached to the water surface.
This cold liquid traps heat underneath it and causes deeper layers to heat up.
This increases the overall temperature of the ocean, which makes it less able to absorb CO2 from the atmosphere.
As a result, more CO2 will remain in the atmosphere, leading to an increase in global warming.
<Greenhouse effects>
The gases that cause the greenhouse effect include
<Water Vapor>
The most abundant greenhouse gas, but importantly, it can serve as a feedback to the climate.
As the Earths atmosphere warms, water vapor will increase, but the possibility of clouds and precipitation will increase, which becomes some of the most important feedback mechanisms for the greenhouse effect.
<Carbon Dioxide >
Carbon dioxide is a small but very important component of the atmosphere.
It is released through natural processes such as respiration and volcanic eruptions, as well as through human activities such as deforestation, land use changes, and burning of fossil fuels.
Since the beginning of the industrial revolution, human atmospheric CO 2 concentration has increased by 47.
This is the most important longterm forcing of climate change.
<Methane>
Methane is emitted during the production and transportation of coal, natural gas, and oil.
Methane emissions also originate from the decay of organic waste from livestock and other agricultural activities and municipal solid waste landfills.
<Nitrous Oxide>
Nitrous oxide is 300 times more effective than carbon dioxide, and it also depletes the ozone layer.
Since it also has a shorter lifespan, reducing its lifespan may have a more rapid and significant impact on global warming.
However, the biggest source of nitrous oxide is agriculture, especially fertilized soil and animal manure, which makes it more difficult to control.
Permafrost is frozen soil that contains ancient soil, sediments, and organic matter of plants and animals.
It covers about a quarter of the northern hemisphere.
As the Arctic heats up about twice as fast as the rest of the world, the permafrost begins to melt, and ancient materials are also exposed to oxygen, which causes the gases they release to further exacerbate climate warming.
Although the role of nitrous oxide is to deplete the ozone layer, it is not included in the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer, an international treaty designed to restore the ozone layer by phasing out certain substances.
<Chlorofluorocarbons  and Hydrofluorocarbons >
Synthetic compounds that are entirely industrially sourced can be used in a variety of applications, but due to their ability to help destroy the ozone layer, their production and release into the atmosphere are currently widely regulated by international agreements.
While CFC and HCFC destroy ozone, they also trap heat in the lower atmosphere, leading to global warming and changes in climate and weather.
HFC, which was originally developed to replace CFC and HCFC, also absorbs and captures infrared radiation or heat in the lower atmosphere of the earth.
HFC, CFC and HFC are subsets of a large group of climate change gases called greenhouse gases .
By the end of this century, the addition of greenhouse gases is expected to raise the earths temperature by 2.5 to 8 degrees Fahrenheit.Hydrofluorocarbons, CFCs and HFCs are estimated to account for 11.5 of todays greenhouse gas impact on climate and climate change.
Some of the effects of global climate change include
Sealevel rise
Extinction of local natural species and loss of habitat
More frequent heavy rains and floods
Summer heat
Increased health threats from insects and waterborne diseases

<effect of climate change>
The effects of climate change impact the physical environment, ecosystems and human societies.
The environmental effects of climate change are broad and farreaching.
They affect the water cycle, oceans, sea and land ice , sea level, as well as weather and climate extreme events.
The changes in climate are not uniform across the Earth.
In particular, most land areas have warmed faster than most ocean areas, and the Arctic is warming faster than most other regions.
The magnitude of impacts of climate change can be reduced by climate change mitigation and adaptation.
Climate change has degraded land by raising temperatures, drying soils and increasing wildfire risk.
Recent warming has strongly affected natural biological systems.
Species worldwide are migrating poleward to colder areas.
On land, many species move to higher elevations, whereas marine species seek colder water at greater depths.
Between 1 and 50 of species on land were assessed to be at substantially higher risk of extinction due to climate change.Among the effects of climate change on oceans are an increase of ocean temperatures, more frequent marine heatwaves, a ocean acidification, a rise in sea level from ocean warming and ice sheet melting, sea ice decline, increased upper ocean stratification, reductions in oxygen levels, changes to ocean currents including a weakening of the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation.
The uptake of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere is leading to ocean acidification.
All these changes have knockon effects which disturb marine ecosystems. 
Food security and access to fresh water are at risk due to rising temperatures.
Climate change has profound impacts on human health, directly via heat stress and indirectly via the spread of infectious diseases.
The vulnerability and exposure of humans to climate change varies by economic sector and by country.
Wealthy industrialised countries, which have emitted the most CO2, have more resources and so are the least vulnerable to global warming.
Economic sectors that are likely to be affected include agriculture, fisheries, forestry, energy, insurance, financial services, tourism, and recreation.
Some groups may be particularly at risk from climate change, such as the poor, women, children and indigenous peoples.
They also have much lower levels of capacity for coping with the effects of environmental change.
Climate change can result in environmental migration, especially in developing countries where people are directly dependent on land for food.
<Observed and future changes in temperature>
Global warming affects all elements of Earths climate system.
Global surface temperatures have risen by 1 °C and are expected to rise further in the future.  Nighttime temperatures have increased faster than daytime temperatures.
The impact on the environment, wildlife, society and humanity depends on how much more the Earth warms.
One of the methods scientists use to predict the effects of humancaused climate change is to investigate past natural changes in climate.
To assess changes in Earths past climate scientists have studied tree rings, ice cores, corals, and ocean and lake sediments.
These show that recent warming has surpassed anything in the last 2,000 years.
By the end of the 21st century, temperatures may increase to a level not experienced since the midPliocene, around 3 million years ago.
At that time, mean global temperatures were about 2 to 4 °C warmer than preindustrial temperatures, and the global mean sea level was up to 25 meters higher than it is today.How much the world warms depends on what humans do or not to limit GHG emissions, and how sensitive the climate is to greenhouse gases.
Scientists are pretty sure that with double the amount of GHG in the atmosphere the world would warm by 2.5 °C to 4 °C but how much more humans will emit is less certain.
The projected magnitude of warming by 2100 is closely related to the level of cumulative emissions over the 21st century .
The higher the cumulative emissions over this time period, the greater the level of warming is projected to occur.If emissions of CO2 were to be abruptly stopped and no negative emission technologies deployed, the Earths climate would not start moving back to its preindustrial state.
Instead, temperatures would stay elevated at the same level for several centuries.
After about a thousand years, 20 to 30 of humanemitted CO2 will remain in the atmosphere, not taken up by the ocean or the land, committing the climate to a warmer state long after emissions have stopped.
<Weatherrelated changes>
The lower and middle atmosphere, where nearly all of the weather occurs, are heating due to the enhanced greenhouse effect.
Increased greenhouse gases cause the higher parts of the atmosphere, the stratosphere, to cool.
The heated atmosphere contains more water vapour, which is also a greenhouse gas and acts as a selfreinforcing feedback.As temperatures increase, so does evaporation and atmospheric moisture content that increases heating by trapping outgoing radiation.
Excess water vapour gets caught up in storms and makes them more intense, larger, and potentially longer lasting, so that rain and snow events are stronger and increase risk of flooding.
Extra drying worsens any natural dry spells and droughts, and increases risk of heat waves and wildfires.Climate change makes many aspects of weather more extreme, especially heat waves, drought, rain intensity, and storm size and intensity..
Global warming leads to an increase in extreme weather events such as heat waves, droughts, cyclones, blizzards and rainstorms.
Such events will continue to occur more often and with greater intensity.Extreme event attribution, also known as attribution science, is a field of study in meteorology and climate science that tries to measure how ongoing climate change directly affects recent extreme weather events.
<Rain and snow>
Warming by greenhouse gas forcing has increased contrasts in rainfall amounts between wet and dry seasons, meaning wet seasons are getting wetter, dry seasons are getting drier.
8  Over oceans, salty areas are getting saltier and other regions are becoming less saline.
Warming has also resulted in a detectable increase in the precipitation of northern high latitudes.
8 Higher temperatures lead to increased evaporation and surface drying.
As the air warms, its waterholding capacity also increases, particularly over the oceans.
Air can hold 7 more water vapour for every degree Celsius it is warmed.
8  Changes have already been observed in the amount, intensity, frequency, and type of precipitation.
Widespread increases in heavy precipitation have occurred even in places where total rain amounts have decreased.In the case of precipitation, the rising temperatures and extra heat will intensify the Earths water cycle, which means it will increase evaporation.
Increased atmospheric water vapour results in more frequent and intense downpours and causes stronger extended droughts in certain regions.
As a result, stormaffected areas are likely to experience increases in precipitation and an increased risk of flooding.
In contrast, areas far away from storm tracks are likely to experience less precipitation and an increased risk of drought.
Overall, there is likely to be longer hot dry spells, broken by more intense heavy rainfalls .
151 Changes in regional climate are expected to include greater temperature increases over land, with most warming at high northern latitudes, and least warming over the Southern Ocean and parts of the North Atlantic Ocean.
Future changes in precipitation are expected to follow existing trends, with reduced precipitation over subtropical land areas, and increased precipitation at subpolar latitudes and some equatorial regions.
<Heat waves and temperature extremes>
Climate change will lead to more very hot days and fewer very cold days.
5  The frequency, length and intensity of heat waves will very likely increase over most land areas.
5  Higher growth in greenhouse gas emissions would cause more frequent and severe temperature extremes.
111  Globally, cold waves have decreased in frequency.
8 Heatwaves over land have become more frequent and more intense since the 1950s due to climate change in almost all world regions.
Furthermore, heat waves are more likely to occur simultaneously with droughts.
Marine heatwaves have also increased in frequency, with a doubling since 1980.
The intensity of individual heat waves can often be attributed to global warming.
Some extreme events would have been nearly impossible without human influence on the climate system.
A heatwave that would occur once every ten years before global warming started, now occurs 2.8 times as often.
Under further warming, heatwaves are set to become more frequent.
An event that would occur each ten year, would occur every other year if global warming reaches 2 °C.Heat waves are events where the daily maximum temperature exceeds the average maximum temperature by 5 °C  for more than five consecutive days.
In the last 30 to 40 years , heat waves with high humidity have become more frequent and severe.
Extremely hot nights have doubled in frequency.
The area in which extremely hot summers are observed has increased 50 to 100 fold.
Heat waves with high humidity pose a big risk to human health while heat waves with low humidity lead to dry conditions that increase wildfires.
The mortality from extreme heat is larger than the mortality from hurricanes, lightning, tornadoes, floods, and earthquakes together.It was estimated in 2013 that global warming had increased the probability of local recordbreaking monthly temperatures worldwide by a factor of 5.
This was compared to a baseline climate in which no global warming had occurred.
Using a medium global warming scenario, they project that by 2040, the number of monthly heat records globally could be more than 12 times greater than that of a scenario with no longterm warming.
Study results indicate that limiting global warming to 1.5 °C would prevent most of the tropics from reaching the wetbulb temperature of the human physiological limit of 35 °C.There is some evidence climate change leads to a weakening of the polar vortex, which would make the jet stream more wavy.
This would lead to outbursts of very cold winter weather across parts of Eurasia and North America, as well as very warm air incursions into the Arctic.
<Tropical cyclones and storms>
<Weatherrelated impacts>
<Floods>
A warming climate will intensify rainfall events.
When floods occur in this warmer future, these floods will be more severe.
1156  Some regions will experience an increase in flooding, some a decrease.
This depends on several factors, such as changes in snowmelt, soil moisture and rainfall.
1156  Flooding can be in the form of urban flooding, river flooding or coastal flooding, Sea level rise further increases risks of coastal flooding if sea levels rise by a further 0.15 m, 20 more people will be exposed to a 1 in a 100year coastal flood, assuming no population growth and no further adaptation.
With an extra 0.75 m, this rises to a doubling of people exposed.Global warming makes bigger storm events more common due to an intensification of the water cycle.
This increase in the frequency of large storm events would alter existing IntensityDurationFrequency curves  due to the change in frequency, but also by lifting and steepening the curves in the future.
<Droughts>
Climate change affects multiple factors associated with droughts, such as how much rain falls and how fast the rain evaporates again.
Warming over land drives an increase in atmospheric evaporative demand which will increase the severity and frequency of droughts around much of the world.
1057  Scientists predict that in some regions of the world, there will be less rain in future due to global warming.
These regions will therefore be more prone to drought in future subtropical regions like the Mediterranean, southern Africa, southwestern Australia and southwestern South America, as well as tropical Central America, western Africa and the Amazon basin.
1157 Physics dictates that higher temperatures lead to increased evaporation.
The effect of this is soil drying and increased plant stress which will have impacts on agriculture.
1157  For this reason, even those regions where large changes in precipitation are not expected  will experience soil drying.
1157  The latest prediction of scientists in 2022 is that If emissions of greenhouse gases are not curtailed, about a third of global land areas are projected to suffer from at least moderate drought by 2100.
1157  When droughts occur they are likely to be more intense than in the past.Due to limitations on how much data is available about drought in the past, it is often impossible to confidently attribute a specific drought to humaninduced climate change.
Some areas however, such as the Mediterranean and California, already show the impacts of human activities.
Their impacts are made worse because of increased water demand, population growth, urban expansion, and environmental protection efforts in many areas.The frequency and the duration of droughts have both increased They increased by 29 from the year 2000 to 2022.
The prediction is that by 2050 more than 75 of humanity will live in drought conditions.
37  Land restoration, especially by agroforestry, can help reduce the impact of droughts.In 2019 the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change issued a Special Report on Climate Change and Land.
The main statements of the report include Between 1960 and 2013 the area of drylands in drought increased by 1 per year.
In 2015, around 500 million people lived in areas impacted by desertification between the 1980s and 2000s.
People who live in areas affected by land degradation and desertification are increasingly negatively affected by climate change.In the past, there were some apparently conflicting results in the scientific literature about how drought is changing due to climate change.
This was found to be mostly due to problems with collection and analysis of data, for example in the formulation of the Palmer Drought Severity Index  and the data sets used to determine the evapotranspiration component.
The accurate attribution of the causes of drought also requires accounting for natural variability, especially El Niño Southern Oscillation  effects and better analysis of precipitation data.
<Wildfires>
Globally, climate change promotes the type of weather that makes wildfires more likely.
In some areas, an increase of wildfires has been attributed directly to climate change.
That warmer climate conditions pose more risks of wildfire is consistent with evidence from Earths past there was more fire in warmer periods, and less in colder climatic periods.
Climate change increases evaporation, which can cause vegetation to dry out.
When a fire starts in an area with very dry vegetation, it can spread rapidly.
Higher temperatures can also make the fire season longer, the time period in which severe wildfires are most likely.
In regions where snow is disappearing, the fire season may get particularly more extended.Even though weather conditions are raising the risks of wildfires, the total area burnt by wildfires has decreased globally.
This is mostly the result of the conversion of savanna into croplands, after which there is less forest area that can burn.
Prescribed burning, an indigenous practice in the US and Australia, can reduce the area burnt too, and may form an adaptation to increased risk.
The carbon released from wildfires can further increase greenhouse gas concentrations.
This feedback is not yet fully integrated into climate models.
<Oceans>
From 1850 until 2022, the ocean has absorbed 26  of total anthropogenic emissions.
Emissions during the period 1850 to 2021 amounted to 670  65 gigatons of carbon and were partitioned among the atmosphere , ocean , and land .
<Ice and snow>
The cryosphere, the area of the Earth covered by snow or ice, is extremely sensitive to changes in global climate.
Northern Hemisphere average annual snow cover has declined in recent decades.
This pattern is consistent with warmer global temperatures.
Some of the largest declines have been observed in the spring and summer months.  During the 21st century, snow cover is projected to continue its retreat in almost all regions.
<Glaciers and ice sheets decline>
Since the beginning of the twentieth century, there has been a widespread retreat of glaciers.  The melting of the Greenland and West Antarctic ice sheets will continue to contribute to sea level rise over long timescales.
The Greenland ice sheet loss is mainly driven by melt from the top, whereas Antarctic ice loss is driven by warm ocean water melting the outlet glaciers.
Research on Antarctica published in 2022, including the first map of iceberg calving, doubles the previous estimates of loss from ice shelves.Future melt of the West Antarctic ice sheet is potentially abrupt under a high emission scenario, as a consequence of a partial collapse.
Part of the ice sheet is grounded on bedrock below sea level, making it possibly vulnerable to the selfenhancing process of marine ice sheet instability.
A further hypothesis is that marine ice cliff instability would also contribute to a partial collapse, but limited evidence is available for its importance.
A partial collapse of the ice sheet would lead to rapid sea level rise and a local decrease in ocean salinity.
It would be irreversible on a timescale between decades and millennia.In contrast to the West Antarctic ice sheet, melt of the Greenland ice sheet is projected to be taking place more gradually over millennia.
Sustained warming between 1 °C  and 4 °C  would lead to a complete loss of the ice sheet, contributing 7 m to sea levels globally.
The ice loss could become irreversible due to a further selfenhancing feedback the elevationsurface mass balance feedback.
When ice melts on top of the ice sheet, the elevation drops.
As air temperature is higher at lower altitude, this promotes further melt.
<Sea ice decline>
Sea ice reflects 50 to 70 of the incoming solar radiation, while 6 of the incoming solar energy is reflected by the ocean.
With less solar energy, the sea ice absorbs and holds the surface colder, which can be a positive feedback toward climate change.
As the climate warms, snow cover and sea ice extent decrease.
Largescale measurements of seaice have only been possible since the satellite era.
The age of the sea ice is an important feature of the state of the sea ice cover.Arctic sea ice began to decline at the beginning of the twentieth century but the rate is accelerating.
Since 1979, satellite records indicate the decline in summer sea ice coverage has been about 13 per decade.
The thickness of sea ice has also decreased by 66 or 2.0 m over the last six decades with a shift from permanent ice to largely seasonal ice cover.
While icefree summers are expected to be rare at 1.5 °C degrees of warming, they are set to occur at least once every decade at a warming level of 2.0 °C.
The Arctic will likely become icefree at the end of some summers before 2050.
9 The annual mean Antarctic sea ice area is not showing a clear downwards or upwards trend over the period of reliable satellite data starting in 1979.
1251  There are remaining uncertainties on how to interpret this data due to the limited observational records and discrepancies between modelled and observed results for the sea ice cover.
1253 
<Permafrost thawing>
The southern part of the Arctic region  has experienced a temperature rise of 1 °C to 3 °C  over the last 50 years.
Canada, Alaska and Russia are experiencing initial melting of permafrost.
This may disrupt ecosystems and by increasing bacterial activity in the soil lead to these areas becoming carbon sources instead of carbon sinks.
Eastern Siberias permafrost is gradually disappearing in the southern regions, leading to the loss of nearly 11 of Siberias nearly 11,000 lakes since 1971.
At the same time, western Siberia is at the initial stage where melting permafrost is creating new lakes, which will eventually start disappearing as in the east.
Furthermore, permafrost melting will eventually cause methane release from melting permafrost peat bogs.
<Wildlife and nature>
Recent warming has strongly affected natural biological systems.
Species worldwide are moving poleward to colder areas.
On land, species may move to higher elevations, whereas marine species find colder water at greater depths.
Of the drivers with the biggest global impact on nature, climate change ranks third over the five decades before 2020, with only change in land use and sea use, and direct exploitation of organisms having a greater impact.The impacts of climate change in nature and natures contributions to humans are projected to become more pronounced in the next few decades.
Examples of climatic disruptions include fire, drought, pest infestation, invasion of species, storms, and coral bleaching events.
The stresses caused by climate change, added to other stresses on ecological systems , threaten substantial damage to or complete loss of some unique ecosystems, and extinction of some critically endangered species.
Key interactions between species within ecosystems are often disrupted because species from one location do not move to colder habitats at the same rate, giving rise to rapid changes in the functioning of the ecosystem.
Impacts include changes in regional rainfall patterns, earlier leafing of trees and plants over many regions movements of species to higher latitudes and altitudes in the Northern Hemisphere changes in bird migrations in Europe, North America and Australia and shifting of the oceans plankton and fish from cold to warmadapted communities.
<Ecosystems on land>
Climate change has been estimated to be a major driver of biodiversity loss in cool conifer forests, savannas, mediterraneanclimate systems, tropical forests, and the Arctic tundra.
In other ecosystems, landuse change may be a stronger driver of biodiversity loss, at least in the nearterm.
Beyond the year 2050, climate change may be the major driver for biodiversity loss globally.
Climate change interacts with other pressures such as habitat modification, pollution and invasive species.
Interacting with these pressures, climate change increases extinction risk for a large fraction of terrestrial and freshwater species.
Between 1 and 50 of species in different groups were assessed to be at substantially higher risk of extinction due to climate change.
<Amazon rainforest>
Rainfall that falls on the Amazon rainforest is recycled when it evaporates back into the atmosphere instead of running off away from the rainforest.
This water is essential for sustaining the rainforest.
Due to deforestation the rainforest is losing this ability, exacerbated by climate change which brings more frequent droughts to the area.
The higher frequency of droughts seen in the first two decades of the 21st century, as well as other data, signal that a tipping point from rainforest to savanna might be close.
One study concluded that this ecosystem could enter a mode of a 50yearslong collapse to a savanna around 2021, after which it would become increasingly and disproportionally more difficult to prevent or reverse this shift.
<Marine ecosystems>
Marine heatwaves have seen an increased frequency and have widespread impacts on life in the oceans, such as mass dying events and coral bleaching.
Harmful algae blooms have increased in response to warming waters, loss of oxygen and eutrophication.
Between onequarter and onethird of our fossil fuel emissions are consumed by the earths oceans, which are now 30 percent more acidic than they were in preindustrial times.
This acidification poses a serious threat to aquatic life, particularly creatures such as oysters, clams, and coral with calcified shells or skeletons.
Melting sea ice destroys habitat, including for algae that grows on its underside.  It is likely that the oceans warmed faster between 1993 and 2017 compared to the period starting in 1969.Warm water coral reefs are very sensitive to global warming and ocean acidification.
Coral reefs provide a habitat for thousands of species and ecosystem services such as coastal protection and food.
The resilience of reefs can be improved by curbing local pollution and overfishing, but 70 to 90 of todays warm water coral reefs will disappear even if warming is kept to 1.5 °C.
Coral reefs are not the only framework organisms, organisms that build physical structures that form habitats for other sea creatures, affected by climate change mangroves and seagrass are considered to be at moderate risk for lower levels of global warming according to the Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate.
<Tipping points and irreversible impacts>
Selfreinforcing feedbacks amplify climate change.
The climate system exhibits threshold behaviour or tipping points when these feedbacks lead parts of the Earth system into a new state, such as the runaway loss of ice sheets or the destruction of forests.
Tipping points are studied using data from Earths distant past and by physical modelling.
There is already moderate risk of global tipping points at 1 °C above preindustrial temperatures, and that risk becomes high at 2.5 °C.Tipping points are perhaps the most dangerous aspect of future climate changes, leading to irreversible impacts on society.
Many tipping points are interlinked, so that triggering one may lead to a cascade of effects, even well below 2 °C of warming.
A 2018 study states that 45 of environmental problems, including those caused by climate change are interconnected and make the risk of a domino effect bigger.There are a number of climate change impacts on the environment that may be irreversible, at least over the timescale of many human generations.
These include the largescale singularities such as the melting of the Greenland and West Antarctic ice sheets, and changes to the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation.
In biological systems, the extinction of species would be an irreversible impact.
In social systems, unique cultures may be lost or the survival of endangered languages may be exacerbated due to climate change.
For example, humans living on atoll islands face risks due to sea level rise, sea surface warming, and increased frequency and intensity of extreme weather events.
<Health, food security and water security>
<Health>
<Food security>
Climate change will impact agriculture and food production around the world due to the effects of elevated CO2 in the atmosphere higher temperatures altered precipitation and transpiration regimes increased frequency of extreme events and modified weed, pest, and pathogen pressure.
Droughts result in crop failures and the loss of pasture for livestock.
Loss and poor growth of livestock cause milk yield and meat production to decrease.
The rate of soil erosion is 10 to 20 times higher than the rate of soil accumulation in agricultural areas that use notill farming.
In areas with tilling it is 100 times higher.
Climate change makes this type of land degradation and desertification worse.Climate change is projected to negatively affect all four pillars of food security not only how much food is available, but also how easy food is to access , food quality and how stable the food system is. 
For example, climate change is already affecting the productivity of wheat and other key staples.
The availability, quality and stability of wines are impacted by shifts in temperature affecting the traditional range and practices of  viniculture, and by smoke taint from extreme fire events.In many areas, fisheries have already seen their catch decrease because of global warming and changes in biochemical cycles.
In combination with overfishing, warming waters decrease the maximum catch potential.
12  Global catch potential is projected to reduce further in 2050 by less than 4 if emissions are reduced strongly, and by about 8 for very high future emissions, with growth in the Arctic Ocean.
<Water security>
Between 1.5 and 2.5 billion people live in areas with regular water security issues.
If global warming would reach 4 °C, water insecurity would affect about twice as many people.
Water resources are projected to decrease in most dry subtropical regions and midlatitudes, but increase in high latitudes.
However, as streamflow becomes more variable, even regions with increased water resources can experience additional shortterm shortages.
The arid regions of India, China, the US and Africa are already seeing dry spells and drought impact water availability.
Water resources can be affected by climate change in various ways.
The total amount of freshwater available can change, for instance due to dry spells or droughts.
Heavy rainfall and flooding can have an impact on water quality pollutants can be transported into water bodies by the increased surface runoff.
In coastal regions, more salt may find its way into water resources due to higher sea levels and more intense storms.
Higher temperatures also directly degrade water quality warm water contains less oxygen.
<Economic impacts>
Economic forecasts of the impact of global warming vary considerably.
Researchers have warned that current economic modelling may seriously underestimate the impact of potentially catastrophic climate change, and point to the need for new models that give a more accurate picture of potential damages.
Nevertheless, one 2018 study found that potential global economic gains if countries implement mitigation strategies to comply with the 2 °C target set at the Paris Agreement are in the vicinity of US17 trillion per year up to 2100 compared to a very high emission scenario.Global losses reveal rapidly rising costs due to extreme weather events since the 1970s.
Socioeconomic factors have contributed to the observed trend of global losses, such as population growth and increased wealth.
Part of the growth is also related to regional climatic factors, e.g., changes in precipitation and flooding events.
It is difficult to quantify the relative impact of socioeconomic factors and climate change on the observed trend.
The trend does, however, suggest increasing vulnerability of social systems to climate change.
<Economic inequality>
Climate change has contributed towards global economic inequality.
Wealthy countries in colder regions have either felt little overall economic impact from climate change, or possibly benefited, whereas poor hotter countries very likely grew less than if global warming had not occurred.The total economic impacts from climate change are difficult to estimate, but increase for higher temperature changes.
For instance, total damages are estimated to be 90 less if global warming is limited to 1.5 °C compared to 3.66 °C, a warming level chosen to represent no mitigation.
One study found a 3.5 reduction in global GDP by the end of the century if warming is limited to 3 °C, excluding the potential effect of tipping points.
Another study noted that global economic impact is underestimated by a factor of two to eight when tipping points are excluded from consideration.
In the Oxford Economics high emission scenario, a temperature rise of 2 degrees by 2050 would reduce global GDP by 2.5  7.5.
By the year 2100 in this case, the temperature would rise by 4 degrees, which could reduce the global GDP by 30 in the worst case.
<Most affected sectors apart from agriculture and fisheries>
Thermal power stations  depend on water to cool them.
Not only is there increased demand for fresh water, but climate change can increase the likelihood of drought and fresh water shortages.
Another impact for thermal power plants, is that increasing the temperatures in which they operate reduces their efficiency and hence their output.
Changes in the amount of river flow correlate with the amount of energy produced by a dam.
The result of diminished river flow can be a power shortage in areas that depend heavily on hydroelectric power.
Brazil in particular, is vulnerable due to its having reliance on hydroelectricity as increasing temperatures, lower water flow, and alterations in the rainfall regime, could reduce total energy production by 7 annually by the end of the century.
Oil and natural gas infrastructure is affected by the effects of climate change and the increased risk of disasters such as storm, cyclones, flooding and rising sea levels. 
Insurance is an important tool to manage risks, but often unavailable to poorer households.
Due to climate change, premiums are going up for certain types of insurance, such as flood insurance.
Poor adaptation to climate change further widens the gap between what people can afford and the costs of insurance, as risks increase.
In 2019, Munich Re noted that climate change could cause home insurance to become unaffordable for households at or below average incomes.Roads, airport runways, railway lines and pipelines,  may require increased maintenance and renewal as they become subject to greater temperature variation.
Regions already adversely affected include areas of permafrost, which are subject to high levels of subsidence, resulting in buckling roads, sunken foundations, and severely cracked runways.
<Impacts on infrastructure>
<Human settlements>
A 2020 study projects that regions inhabited by a third of the human population could become as hot as the hottest parts of the Sahara within 50 years without a change in patterns of population growth and without migration, unless greenhouse gas emissions are reduced.
The projected annual average temperature of above 29 °C for these regions would be outside the human temperature niche  a suggested range for climate biologically suitable for humans based on historical data of mean annual temperatures   and the most affected regions have little adaptive capacity as of 2020.Climate change threatens the health and survival of urban trees and the various benefits they deliver to urban inhabitants.In 2019 the Crowther Lab from ETH Zürich paired the climatic conditions of 520 major cities worldwide with the predicted climatic conditions of cities in 2050.
22 of the major cities are predicted to have climatic conditions that do not exist in any city today.
2050 London will have a climate similar to 2019 Melbourne, Athens and Madrid like Fez, Morocco, Nairobi like Maputo.
The Indian city Pune will be like Bamako in Mali, Bamako will be like Niamey in Niger.
Brasilia will be like Goiania.Increased extreme heat exposure from both climate change and the urban heat island effect threatens urban settlements.
<Sea level rise>
A major challenge for human settlements is sea level rise, indicated by ongoing observation and research of rapid declines in icemass balance from both Greenland and Antarctica.
Estimates for 2100 are at least twice as large as previously estimated by IPCC AR4, with an upper limit of about two meters.
Depending on regional changes, increased precipitation patterns can cause more flooding or extended drought stresses water resources.
In small islands and megadeltas, inundation as a result of sea level rise is expected to threaten vital infrastructure and human settlements.
This could lead to issues of statelessness for populations in countries such as the Maldives and Tuvalu and homelessness in countries with lowlying areas such as Bangladesh.
In 1991, 140,000 people died and the 10 million became homeless when the floods hit Bangladesh.
In Myanmar, which was hit in 2007, a storm killed 146,000 people.
<Especially affected regions>
The Arctic, Africa, small islands, Asian megadeltas and the Middle East are regions that are likely to be especially affected by climate change.
Lowlatitude, lessdeveloped regions are at most risk of experiencing negative impacts due to climate change.The ten countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations  are among the most vulnerable in the world to the negative effects of climate change, however, ASEANs climate mitigation efforts are not commensurate with the climate change threats the region faces.
Africa is one of the most vulnerable continents to climate variability and change because of multiple existing stresses and low adaptive capacity.
Climate change is projected to decrease freshwater availability in central, south, east and southeast Asia, particularly in large river basins.
With population growth and increasing demand from higher standards of living, this decrease could adversely affect more than a billion people by the 2050s.
Small islands, whether located in the tropics or higher latitudes, are already exposed to extreme weather events and changes in sea level.
This existing exposure will likely make these areas sensitive to the effects of climate change.
Developed countries are also vulnerable to climate change, and have already been negatively affected by increases in the severity and frequency of some extreme weather events, such as heat waves, floods, wildfires, and tropical cyclones.
<Lowlying coastal regions>
For historical reasons to do with trade, many of the worlds largest and most prosperous cities are on the coast.
In developing countries, the poorest often live on floodplains, because it is the only available space, or fertile agricultural land.
These settlements often lack infrastructure such as dykes and early warning systems.
Poorer communities also tend to lack the insurance, savings, or access to credit needed to recover from disasters.
Socioeconomic impacts of climate change in coastal and lowlying areas will be overwhelmingly adverse.
The following impacts were projected in 2007 with very high confidence
Coastal and lowlying areas would be exposed to increasing risks including coastal erosion due to climate change and sea level rise.
By the 2080s, millions of people would experience floods every year due to sea level rise.
The numbers affected were projected to be largest in the densely populated and lowlying megadeltas of Asia and Africa and smaller islands were judged to be especially vulnerable.Given high coastal population density, estimates of the number of people at risk of coastal flooding from climatedriven sealevel rise varies from 190 million, to 300 million or even 640 million in a worstcase scenario related to the instability of the Antarctic ice sheet.
The most people affected are in the denselypopulated and lowlying megadeltas of Asia and Africa.The Greenland ice sheet is estimated to have reached a point of no return, continuing to melt even if warming stopped.
Over time that would submerge many of the worlds coastal cities including lowlying islands, especially combined with storm surges and high tides.
<Small islands>
Small islands developing states are especially vulnerable to the effects of climate change, especially sea level rise.
They are expected to experience more intense storm surges, salt water intrusion, and coastal destruction.
Lowlying small islands in the Pacific, Indian, and Caribbean regions are at risk of permanent inundation and population displacement.
On the islands of Fiji, Tonga and western Samoa, concentrations of migrants from outer islands inhabit low and unsafe areas along the coasts.Atoll nations, which include countries that are composed entirely of the smallest form of islands, called motus, are at risk of entire population displacement.
These nations include Kiribati, Maldives, the Marshall Islands, Tokelau, and Tuvalu.
Vulnerability is increased by small size, isolation from other land, low financial resources, and lack of protective infrastructure.A study that engaged the experiences of residents in atoll communities found that the cultural identities of these populations are strongly tied to these lands.
Human rights activists argue that the potential loss of entire atoll countries, and consequently the loss of national sovereignty, selfdetermination, cultures, and indigenous lifestyles cannot be compensated for financially.
Some researchers suggest that the focus of international dialogues on these issues should shift from ways to relocate entire communities to strategies that instead allow for these communities to remain on their lands.
<Impacts on societies>
Climate change impacts health, the availability of drinking water and food, inequality and economic growth.
The effects of climate change are often interlinked and can exacerbate each other as well as existing vulnerabilities.
The impacts are often exacerbated by related environmental disruptions and pressures such as pollution and biodiversity loss.
Some areas may become too hot for humans to live in.
People in some areas may experience internal or longdistance displacement  triggered by climate change related changes or disasters.
The effects of climate change, in combination with the sustained increases in greenhouse gas emissions, have led scientists to characterize it as a climate emergency or climate crisis.
Some climate researchers and activists have called it an existential threat to civilization.
The consequences of climate change, and the failure to address it, can draw focus and resources from tackling its root causes, leading to what researchers have termed a climate doom loop.
<Displacement and migration>
Climate change affects displacement of people in several ways.
Firstly, involuntary displacement may increase through the increased number and severity of weatherrelated disasters which destroy homes and habitats.
Effects of climate change such as desertification and rising sea levels gradually erode livelihood and force communities to abandon traditional homelands for more accommodating environments.
On the other hand, some households may fall  into poverty due to climate change, limiting their ability to move to areas less affected.
According to the Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre in 2020 approximately 30 million people were displaced by extreme weather events while approximately 10 million by violence and wars and climate change significantly contributed to this.
The United Nations says there are already 64 million migrants in the world fleeing wars, hunger, persecution and the effects of global warming.
In 2018, the World Bank estimated that climate change will cause internal migration of between 31 and 143 million people as they escape crop failures, water scarcity, and sea level rise.
The study only included SubSaharan Africa, South Asia, and Latin America.Asia and the Pacific is the global area most prone to natural disasters, both in terms of the absolute number of disasters and of populations affected.
It is highly exposed to climate impacts, and is home to highly vulnerable population groups, who are disproportionately poor and marginalized.
A 2015 Asian Development Bank report highlights environmental hot spots that are particular risk of flooding, cyclones, typhoons, and water stress.Gradual but pervasive environmental change and sudden natural disasters both influence the nature and extent of human migration but in different ways.
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees stated that climate change increases mass displacement, in many regions, including Sahel, East Africa, South Asia, the drought corridor in Latin America.
90 of refugees comes from climate vulnerable hotspots.Some Pacific Ocean island nations, such as Tuvalu, Kiribati, and the Maldives, are considering the eventual possibility of evacuation, as flood defense may become economically unrealistic. 
Governments have considered various approaches to reduce migration compelled by environmental conditions in atrisk communities, including programs of social protection, livelihoods development, basic urban infrastructure development, and disaster risk management.  Some experts support migration as an appropriate way for people to cope with environmental changes.  However, this is controversial because migrants  particularly lowskilled ones  are among the most vulnerable people in society and are often denied basic protections and access to services.Slowonset disasters and gradual environmental erosion such as desertification, reduction of soil fertility, coastal erosion and sealevel rise are likely to induce longterm migration.
Migration related to desertification and reduced soil fertility is likely to be predominantly from rural areas in developing countries to towns and cities.
<Conflict>
Climate change can worsen conflicts by exacerbating tensions over limited resources like drinking water .
Climate change also has the potential to cause large population dislocations and migration, which can also lead to increased tensions.
However, factors other than climate change are judged to be substantially more important in affecting conflict.
These factors include intergroup inequality and low socioeconomic development.
In some cases, climate change can even lead to more peaceful relationships between groups, as environmental problems requires common policy to be developed.Global warming has been described as a threat multiplier.
Certain conditions make it more likely that climate change impacts conflict ethnic exclusion, an economy dependent on agriculture, insufficient infrastructure, poor local governance, and low levels of development.
A spike in wheat prices following crop losses from a period of drought may have contributed to the onset of the Arab Spring protests and revolutions in 2010.
<Social impacts on vulnerable groups>
The impacts of climate change on humans are not distributed uniformly within communities.
Individual and social factors such as gender, age, education, ethnicity, geography and language lead to differential vulnerability and capacity to adapt to the effects of climate change.
The following more vulnerable groups have been identified
People living in poverty Climate change disproportionally affects poor people in lowincome communities and developing countries around the world.
Those in poverty have a higher chance of experiencing the illeffects of climate change due to the increased exposure and vulnerability.
A 2020 World Bank paper estimated that between 32 million to 132 million additional people will be pushed into extreme poverty by 2030 due to climate change.
Women Climate change increases gender inequality, reduces womens ability to be financially independent, and has an overall negative impact on the social and political rights of women, especially in economies that are heavily based on agriculture.
Indigenous peoples Indigenous communities geographically tend to be located in regions more vulnerable to climate change such as native rainforests, the Arctic, and coastal areas.
Indigenous communities across the globe generally have economic disadvantages that are not as prevalent in nonindigenous communities due to the ongoing oppression they have experienced.
These disadvantages include lower education levels and higher rates of poverty and unemployment, which add to their vulnerability to climate change.
Children The Lancet review on health and climate change lists children as the worstaffected category by climate change.
Children are also 14 to 44 percent more likely to die from environmental factors, again leaving them the most vulnerable.
Those in urban areas will be affected by lower air quality and overcrowding, and will struggle the most to better their situation.
Racial minorities The environmental justice  movement and climate justice  movement address environmental racism in bringing attention and enacting change so that marginalized populations are not disproportionately vulnerable to climate change and pollution.
<Possibility of societal collapse>
Several researchers have suggested that collapse of the current societal organization  the contemporary global, interconnected civilization  could occur at 3 degrees of warming, especially when considering that climate change is not the only environmental pressure and challenge humanity faces.
<Possible responses>
The magnitude of future impacts of climate change can be reduced by climate change mitigation and adaptation.
Mitigation policies currently in place will result in about 2.7 °C  warming above preindustrial levels.
If all unconditional pledges and targets made by governments are achieved the temperature will rise by around 2.4 °C.
If  additionally all the countries that adopted or are considering to adopt netzero targets will achieve it the temperature will rise by a median of 1.8 °C.
There is a substantial gap between national plans and commitments and actions so far taken by governments around the world.

<carbon dioxide in earth atmosphere>
In Earths atmosphere, carbon dioxide is a trace gas that plays an integral part in the greenhouse effect, carbon cycle, photosynthesis and oceanic carbon cycle.
It is one of several greenhouse gases in the atmosphere of Earth.
The current global average concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere is 421 ppm as of May 2022.
This is an increase of 50 since the start of the Industrial Revolution, up from 280 ppm during the 10,000 years prior to the mid18th century.  The increase is due to human activity.
Burning fossil fuels is the main cause of these increased CO2 concentrations and also the main cause of climate change.
Other large anthropogenic sources include cement production, deforestation, and biomass burning. 
While transparent to visible light, carbon dioxide is a greenhouse gas, absorbing and emitting infrared radiation at its two infraredactive vibrational frequencies.
CO2 absorbs and emits infrared radiation at wavelengths of 4.26 μm   and 14.99 μm  .
It plays a significant role in influencing Earths surface temperature through the greenhouse effect.
Light emission from the Earths surface is most intense in the infrared region between 200 and 2500 cm1, as opposed to light emission from the much hotter Sun which is most intense in the visible region.
Absorption of infrared light at the vibrational frequencies of atmospheric CO2 traps energy near the surface, warming the surface and the lower atmosphere.
Less energy reaches the upper atmosphere, which is therefore cooler because of this absorption.Increases in atmospheric concentrations of CO2 and other longlived greenhouse gases such as methane, nitrous oxide and ozone increase the absorption and emission of infrared radiation by the atmosphere, causing the observed rise in average global temperature and ocean acidification.
Another direct effect is the CO2 fertilization effect.
These changes cause a range of indirect effects of climate change on the physical environment, ecosystems and human societies.
Carbon dioxide exerts a larger overall warming influence than all of the other greenhouse gases combined.
It has an atmospheric lifetime that increases with the cumulative amount of fossil carbon extracted and burned, due to the imbalance that this activity has imposed on Earths fast carbon cycle.
This means that some fraction  of the fossil carbon transferred thus far will persist in the atmosphere as elevated CO2 levels for many thousands of years after these carbon transfer activities begin to subside.
The carbon cycle is a biogeochemical cycle in which carbon is exchanged between the Earths oceans, soil, rocks and the biosphere.
Plants and other photoautotrophs use solar energy to produce carbohydrate from atmospheric carbon dioxide and water by photosynthesis.
Almost all other organisms depend on carbohydrate derived from photosynthesis as their primary source of energy and carbon compounds. 
The present atmospheric concentration of CO2 is the highest for 14 million years.
Concentrations of CO2 in the atmosphere were as high as 4,000 ppm during the Cambrian period about 500 million years ago, when the concentration was 20 times greater than today, and as low as 180 ppm during the Quaternary glaciation of the last two million years.
Reconstructed temperature records for the last 420 million years indicate that atmospheric CO2 concentrations peaked at 2,000 ppm during the Devonian  period, and again in the Triassic  period and was four times current levels during the Jurassic period .
<Current concentration and future trends>
<Current situation>
Since the start of the Industrial Revolution, atmospheric CO2 concentration have been increasing, causing global warming and ocean acidification.
As of May 2022, the average monthly level of CO2 in Earths atmosphere reached 421 parts per million by volume .  Parts per million refers to the number of carbon dioxide molecules per million molecules of dry air.
Previously, the value was 280 ppm during the 10,000 years up to the mid18th century.Each part per million of CO2 in the atmosphere represents approximately 2.13 gigatonnes of carbon, or 7.82 gigatonnes of CO2.It was pointed out in 2021 that the current rates of increase of the concentration of the major greenhouse gases  are unprecedented over at least the last 800,000 years.
<Annual and regional fluctuations>
Atmospheric CO2 concentrations fluctuate slightly with the seasons, falling during the Northern Hemisphere spring and summer as plants consume the gas and rising during northern autumn and winter as plants go dormant or die and decay.
The level drops by about 6 or 7 ppm  from May to September during the Northern Hemispheres growing season, and then goes up by about 8 or 9 ppm.
The Northern Hemisphere dominates the annual cycle of CO2 concentration because it has much greater land area and plant biomass than the Southern Hemisphere.
Concentrations reach a peak in May as the Northern Hemisphere spring greenup begins, and decline to a minimum in October, near the end of the growing season.Concentrations also vary on a regional basis, most strongly near the ground with much smaller variations aloft.
In urban areas concentrations are generally higher and indoors they can reach 10 times background levels.
<Measurements and predictions made in the recent past>
Estimates in 2001 found that the current carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere may be the highest in the last 20 million years.
This figure has been corrected down since then, whereby the latest estimate is now 14 million years .
Data from 2009 found that the global mean CO2 concentration was rising at a rate of approximately 2 ppmyear and accelerating.
The daily average concentration of atmospheric CO2 at Mauna Loa Observatory first exceeded 400 ppm on 10 May 2013 although this concentration had already been reached in the Arctic in June 2012.
Data from 2013 showed that the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is this high for the first time in 55 years of measurementand probably more than 3 million years of Earth history.
As of 2018, CO2 concentrations were measured to be 410 ppm.
<Measurement techniques>
The concentrations of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere are expressed as parts per million by volume .
To convert from the usual ppmv units to ppm mass, multiply by the ratio of the molar weight of CO2 to that of air, i.e.
times 1.52 .
The first reproducibly accurate measurements of atmospheric CO2 were from flask sample measurements made by Dave Keeling at Caltech in the 1950s.
Measurements at Mauna Loa have been ongoing since 1958.
Additionally, measurements are also made at many other sites around the world.
Many measurement sites are part of larger global networks.
Global network data are often made publicly available.
<Data networks>
There are several surface measurement  networks including NOAAERSL, WDCGG, and RAMCES.
The NOAAESRL Baseline Observatory Network, and the Scripps Institution of Oceanography Network data are hosted at the CDIAC at ORNL.
The World Data Centre for Greenhouse Gases , part of GAW, data are hosted by the JMA.
The Reseau Atmospherique de Mesure des Composes an Effet de Serre database  is part of IPSL.
From these measurements, further products are made which integrate data from the various sources.
These products also address issues such as data discontinuity and sparseness.
GLOBALVIEWCO2 is one of these products.Ongoing groundbased total column measurements began more recently.
Column measurements typically refer to an averaged column amount denoted XCO2, rather than a surface only measurement.
These measurements are made by the TCCON.
These data are also hosted on the CDIAC, and made publicly available according to the data use policy.
<Satellite measurements>
Spacebased measurements of carbon dioxide are also a recent addition to atmospheric XCO2 measurements.
SCIAMACHY aboard ESAs ENVISAT made global column XCO2 measurements from 2002 to 2012.
AIRS aboard NASAs Aqua satellite makes global XCO2 measurements and was launched shortly after ENVISAT in 2012.
More recent satellites have significantly improved the data density and precision of global measurements.
Newer missions have higher spectral and spatial resolutions.
JAXAs GOSAT was the first dedicated GHG monitoring satellite to successfully achieve orbit in 2009.
NASAs OCO2 launched in 2014 was the second.
Various other satellites missions to measure atmospheric XCO2 are planned.
<Analytical methods to investigate sources of CO2>
The burning of longburied fossil fuels releases CO2 containing carbon of different isotopic ratios to those of living plants, enabling distinction between natural and humancaused contributions to CO2 concentration.
There are higher atmospheric CO2 concentrations in the Northern Hemisphere, where most of the worlds population lives , compared to the southern hemisphere.
This difference has increased as anthropogenic emissions have increased.
Atmospheric O2 levels are decreasing in Earths atmosphere as it reacts with the carbon in fossil fuels to form CO2.
<Causes of the current increase>
<Anthropogenic CO2 emissions>
While CO2 absorption and release is always happening as a result of natural processes, the recent rise in CO2 levels in the atmosphere is known to be mainly due to human  activity.
Anthropogenic carbon emissions exceed the amount that can be taken up or balanced out by natural sinks.
Thus carbon dioxide has gradually accumulated in the atmosphere and, as of May 2022, its concentration is 50 above preindustrial levels.The extraction and burning of fossil fuels, releasing carbon that has been underground for many millions of years, has increased the atmospheric concentration of CO2.
As of year 2019 the extraction and burning of geologic fossil carbon by humans releases over 30 gigatonnes of CO2  each year.
This larger disruption to the natural balance is responsible for recent growth in the atmospheric CO2 concentration.  Currently about half of the carbon dioxide released from the burning of fossil fuels is not absorbed by vegetation and the oceans and remains in the atmosphere.Burning fossil fuels such as coal, petroleum, and natural gas is the leading cause of increased anthropogenic CO2 deforestation is the second major cause.
In 2010, 9.14 gigatonnes of carbon  were released from fossil fuels and cement production worldwide, compared to 6.15 GtC in 1990.
In addition, land use change contributed 0.87 GtC in 2010, compared to 1.45 GtC in 1990.  In the period 1751 to 1900, about 12 GtC were released as CO2 to the atmosphere from burning of fossil fuels, whereas from 1901 to 2013 the figure was about 380 GtC.The International Energy Agency estimates that the top 1 of emitters globally each had carbon footprints of over 50 tonnes of CO2 in 2021, more than 1,000 times greater than those of the bottom 1 of emitters.
The global average energyrelated carbon footprint is around 4.7 tonnes of CO2 per person.
<Roles in various natural processes on Earth>
<Greenhouse effect>
Earths natural greenhouse effect makes life as we know it possible and carbon dioxide plays a significant role in providing for the relatively high temperature on Earth.
The greenhouse effect is a process by which thermal radiation from a planetary atmosphere warms the planets surface beyond the temperature it would have in the absence of its atmosphere.
Without the greenhouse effect, the Earths average surface temperature would be about 18 °C  compared to Earths actual average surface temperature of approximately 14 °C .
Water is responsible for most  of the total greenhouse effect, and the role of water vapor as a greenhouse gas depends on temperature.
On Earth, carbon dioxide is the most relevant, direct anthropologically influenced greenhouse gas.
Carbon dioxide is often mentioned in the context of its increased influence as a greenhouse gas since the preindustrial  era.
In 2013, the increase in CO2 was estimated to be responsible for 1.82 W m2 of the 2.63 W m2 change in radiative forcing on Earth .The concept of atmospheric CO2 increasing ground temperature was first published by Svante Arrhenius in 1896.
The increased radiative forcing due to increased CO2 in the Earths atmosphere is based on the physical properties of CO2 and the nonsaturated absorption windows where CO2 absorbs outgoing longwave energy.  The increased forcing drives further changes in Earths energy balance and, over the longer term, in Earths climate.
<Carbon cycle>
Atmospheric carbon dioxide plays an integral role in the Earths carbon cycle whereby CO2 is removed from the atmosphere by some natural processes such as photosynthesis and deposition of carbonates, to form limestones for example, and added back to the atmosphere by other natural processes such as respiration and the acid dissolution of carbonate deposits.
There are two broad carbon cycles on Earth the fast carbon cycle and the slow carbon cycle.
The fast carbon cycle refers to movements of carbon between the environment and living things in the biosphere whereas the slow carbon cycle involves the movement of carbon between the atmosphere, oceans, soil, rocks, and volcanism.
Both cycles are intrinsically interconnected and atmospheric CO2 facilitates the linkage.
Natural sources of atmospheric CO2 include volcanic outgassing, the combustion of organic matter, wildfires and the respiration processes of living aerobic organisms.
Manmade sources of CO2 include the burning of fossil fuels for heating, power generation and transport, as well as some industrial processes such as cement making.
It is also produced by various microorganisms from fermentation and cellular respiration.
Plants, algae and cyanobacteria convert carbon dioxide to carbohydrates by a process called photosynthesis.
They gain the energy needed for this reaction from absorption of sunlight by chlorophyll and other pigments.
Oxygen, produced as a byproduct of photosynthesis, is released into the atmosphere and subsequently used for respiration by heterotrophic organisms and other plants, forming a cycle with carbon.
Most sources of CO2 emissions are natural, and are balanced to various degrees by similar CO2 sinks.
For example, the decay of organic material in forests, grasslands, and other land vegetation  including forest fires  results in the release of about 436 gigatonnes of CO2  every year, while CO2 uptake by new growth on land counteracts these releases, absorbing 451 Gt .  Although much CO2 in the early atmosphere of the young Earth was produced by volcanic activity, modern volcanic activity releases only 130 to 230 megatonnes of CO2 each year.
Natural sources are more or less balanced by natural sinks, in the form of chemical and biological processes which remove CO2 from the atmosphere.  
Overall, there is a large natural flux of atmospheric CO2 into and out of the biosphere, both on land and in the oceans.
In the preindustrial era, each of  these fluxes were in balance to such a degree that little net CO2 flowed between the land and ocean reservoirs of carbon, and little change resulted in the atmospheric concentration.  From the human preindustrial era to 1940, the terrestrial biosphere represented a net source of atmospheric CO2 , but subsequently switched to a net sink with growing fossil carbon emissions.
In 2012, about 57 of humanemitted CO2, mostly from the burning of fossil carbon, was taken up by land and ocean sinks.The ratio of the increase in atmospheric CO2 to emitted CO2 is known as the airborne fraction.
This ratio varies in the shortterm and is typically about 45 over longer  periods.
Estimated carbon in global terrestrial vegetation increased from approximately 740 gigatonnes in 1910 to 780 gigatonnes in 1990.
<Photosynthesis>
Carbon dioxide in the Earths atmosphere is essential to life and to most of the planetary biosphere.
The average rate of energy capture by photosynthesis globally is approximately 130 terawatts, which is about six times larger than the current power consumption of human civilization.
Photosynthetic organisms also convert around 100 to 115 billion metric tonnes of carbon into biomass per year.Photosynthetic organisms are photoautotrophs, which means that they are able to synthesize food directly from CO2 and water using energy from light.
However, not all organisms that use light as a source of energy carry out photosynthesis, since photoheterotrophs use organic compounds, rather than CO2, as a source of carbon.
In plants, algae and cyanobacteria, photosynthesis releases oxygen.
This is called oxygenic photosynthesis.
Although there are some differences between oxygenic photosynthesis in plants, algae, and cyanobacteria, the overall process is quite similar in these organisms.
However, there are some types of bacteria that carry out anoxygenic photosynthesis, which consumes CO2 but does not release oxygen.
Carbon dioxide is converted into sugars in a process called carbon fixation.
Carbon fixation is an endothermic redox reaction, so photosynthesis needs to supply both the source of energy to drive this process and the electrons needed to convert CO2 into a carbohydrate.
This addition of the electrons is a reduction reaction.
In general outline and in effect, photosynthesis is the opposite of cellular respiration, in which glucose and other compounds are oxidized to produce CO2 and water, and to release exothermic chemical energy to drive the organisms metabolism.
However, the two processes take place through a different sequence of chemical reactions and in different cellular compartments.
<Oceanic carbon cycle>
The Earths oceans contain a large amount of CO2 in the form of bicarbonate and carbonate ionsmuch more than the amount in the atmosphere.
The bicarbonate is produced in reactions between rock, water, and carbon dioxide.
One example is the dissolution of calcium carbonate
CaCO3  CO2  H2O  Ca2  2 HCO3Reactions like this tend to buffer changes in atmospheric CO2.
Since the right side of the reaction produces an acidic compound, adding CO2 on the left side decreases the pH of seawater, a process which has been termed ocean acidification .
Reactions between CO2 and noncarbonate rocks also add bicarbonate to the seas.
This can later undergo the reverse of the above reaction to form carbonate rocks, releasing half of the bicarbonate as CO2.
Over hundreds of millions of years, this has produced huge quantities of carbonate rocks.
From 1850 until 2022, the ocean has absorbed 26  of total anthropogenic emissions.
However, the rate at which the ocean will take it up in the future is less certain.
Even if equilibrium is reached, including dissolution of carbonate minerals, the increased concentration of bicarbonate and decreased or unchanged concentration of carbonate ion will give rise to a higher concentration of unionized carbonic acid and dissolved CO2.
This higher concentration in the seas, along with higher temperatures, would mean a higher equilibrium concentration of CO2 in the air.Carbon moves between the atmosphere, vegetation , the soil, the surface layer of the ocean, and the deep ocean.
From 1850 until 2022, the ocean has absorbed 26  of total anthropogenic emissions.
<Effects of current increase>
<Direct effects>
Direct effects of increasing CO2 concentrations in the atmosphere include increasing global temperatures, ocean acidification and a CO2 fertilization effect on plants and crops.
<Temperature rise>
<Ocean acidification>
<CO2 fertilization effect>
<Other direct effects>
CO2 emissions have also led to the stratosphere contracting by 400 meters since 1980, which could affect satellite operations, GPS systems and radio communications.
<Indirect effects and impacts>
<Approaches for reducing CO2 concentrations>
Carbon dioxide has unique longterm effects on climate change that are nearly irreversible for a thousand years after emissions stop .
The greenhouse gases methane and nitrous oxide do not persist over time in the same way as carbon dioxide.
Even if human carbon dioxide emissions were to completely cease, atmospheric temperatures are not expected to decrease significantly in the short term.
This is because the air temperature is determined by a balance between heating, due to greenhouse gases, and cooling due to heat transfer to the ocean.
If emissions were to stop, CO2 levels and the heating effect would slowly decrease, but simultaneously the cooling due to heat transfer would diminish , with the result that the air temperature would decrease only slowly.
Sea temperatures would continue to rise, causing thermal expansion and some sea level rise.
Lowering global temperatures more rapidly would require carbon sequestration or geoengineering.
Various techniques have been proposed for removing excess carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.
<Concentrations in the geologic past>
Carbon dioxide is believed to have played an important effect in regulating Earths temperature throughout its 4.7 billion year history.
Early in the Earths life, scientists have found evidence of liquid water indicating a warm world even though the Suns output is believed to have only been 70 of what it is today.
Higher carbon dioxide concentrations in the early Earths atmosphere might help explain this faint young sun paradox.
When Earth first formed, Earths atmosphere may have contained more greenhouse gases and CO2 concentrations may have been higher, with estimated partial pressure as large as 1,000 kPa , because there was no bacterial photosynthesis to reduce the gas to carbon compounds and oxygen.
Methane, a very active greenhouse gas, may have been more prevalent as well.Carbon dioxide concentrations have shown several cycles of variation from about 180 parts per million during the deep glaciations of the Holocene and Pleistocene to 280 parts per million during the interglacial periods.
Carbon dioxide concentrations have varied widely over the Earths 4.54 billion year history.
It is believed to have been present in Earths first atmosphere, shortly after Earths formation.
The second atmosphere, consisting largely of nitrogen and CO2 was produced by outgassing from volcanism, supplemented by gases produced during the late heavy bombardment of Earth by huge asteroids.
A major part of carbon dioxide emissions were soon dissolved in water and incorporated in carbonate sediments.
The production of free oxygen by cyanobacterial photosynthesis eventually led to the oxygen catastrophe that ended Earths second atmosphere and brought about the Earths third atmosphere  2.4 billion years before the present.
Carbon dioxide concentrations dropped from 4,000 parts per million during the Cambrian period about 500 million years ago to as low as 180 parts per million during the Quaternary glaciation of the last two million years.
<Drivers of ancientEarth CO2 concentration>
On long timescales, atmospheric CO2 concentration is determined by the balance among geochemical processes including organic carbon burial in sediments, silicate rock weathering, and volcanic degassing.
The net effect of slight imbalances in the carbon cycle over tens to hundreds of millions of years has been to reduce atmospheric CO2.
On a timescale of billions of years, such downward trend appears bound to continue indefinitely as occasional massive historical releases of buried carbon due to volcanism will become less frequent .
The rates of these processes are extremely slow hence they are of no relevance to the atmospheric CO2 concentration over the next hundreds or thousands of years.
<Photosynthesis in the geologic past>
Over the course of Earths geologic history CO2 concentrations have played a role in biological evolution.
The first photosynthetic organisms probably evolved early in the evolutionary history of life and most likely used reducing agents such as hydrogen or hydrogen sulfide as sources of electrons, rather than water.
Cyanobacteria appeared later, and the excess oxygen they produced contributed to the oxygen catastrophe, which rendered the evolution of complex life possible.
In recent geologic times, low CO2 concentrations below 600 parts per million might have been the stimulus that favored the evolution of C4 plants which increased greatly in abundance between 7 and 5 million years ago over plants that use the less efficient C3 metabolic pathway.
At current atmospheric pressures photosynthesis shuts down when atmospheric CO2 concentrations fall below 150 ppm and 200 ppm although some microbes can extract carbon from the air at much lower concentrations.
<Measuring ancientEarth CO2 concentration>
The most direct method for measuring atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations for periods before instrumental sampling is to measure bubbles of air  trapped in the Antarctic or Greenland ice sheets.
The most widely accepted of such studies come from a variety of Antarctic cores and indicate that atmospheric CO2 concentrations were about 260 to 280 ppmv immediately before industrial emissions began and did not vary much from this level during the preceding 10,000 years.
The longest ice core record comes from East Antarctica, where ice has been sampled to an age of 800,000 years.
During this time, the atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration has varied between 180 and 210 ppm during ice ages, increasing to 280 to 300 ppm during warmer interglacials.
The beginning of human agriculture during the current Holocene epoch may have been strongly connected to the atmospheric CO2 increase after the last ice age ended, a fertilization effect raising plant biomass growth and reducing stomatal conductance requirements for CO2 intake, consequently reducing transpiration water losses and increasing water usage efficiency.Various proxy measurements have been used to attempt to determine atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations millions of years in the past.
These include boron and carbon isotope ratios in certain types of marine sediments, and the number of stomata observed on fossil plant leaves.Phytane is a type of diterpenoid alkane.
It is a breakdown product of chlorophyll and is now used to estimate ancient CO2 levels.
Phytane gives both a continuous record of CO2 concentrations but it also can overlap a break in the CO2 record of over 500 million years.
<600 to 400 Ma>
There is evidence for high CO2 concentrations of over 3,000 ppm between 200 and 150 million years ago, and of over 6,000 ppm between 600 and 400 million years ago.
<60 to 5 Ma>
In more recent times, atmospheric CO2 concentration continued to fall after about 60 million years ago.
About 34 million years ago, the time of the EoceneOligocene extinction event and when the Antarctic ice sheet started to take its current form, CO2 was about 760 ppm, and there is geochemical evidence that concentrations were less than 300 ppm by about 20 million years ago.
Decreasing CO2 concentration, with a tipping point of 600 ppm, was the primary agent forcing Antarctic glaciation.
Low CO2 concentrations may have been the stimulus that favored the evolution of C4 plants, which increased greatly in abundance between 7 and 5 million years ago.

<climate change>
In common usage, climate change describes global warmingthe ongoing increase in global average temperatureand its effects on Earths climate system.
Climate change in a broader sense also includes previous longterm changes to Earths climate.
The current rise in global average temperature is more rapid than previous changes, and is primarily caused by humans burning fossil fuels.
Fossil fuel use, deforestation, and some agricultural and industrial practices increase greenhouse gases, notably carbon dioxide and methane.
Greenhouse gases absorb some of the heat that the Earth radiates after it warms from sunlight.
Larger amounts of these gases trap more heat in Earths lower atmosphere, causing global warming.
Due to climate change, deserts are expanding, while heat waves and wildfires are becoming more common.
Increased warming in the Arctic has contributed to melting permafrost, glacial retreat and sea ice loss.
Higher temperatures are also causing more intense storms, droughts, and other weather extremes.
Rapid environmental change in mountains, coral reefs, and the Arctic is forcing many species to relocate or become extinct.
Even if efforts to minimise future warming are successful, some effects will continue for centuries.
These include ocean heating, ocean acidification and sea level rise.Climate change threatens people with increased flooding, extreme heat, increased food and water scarcity, more disease, and economic loss.
Human migration and conflict can also be a result.
The World Health Organization  calls climate change the greatest threat to global health in the 21st century.
Societies and ecosystems will experience more severe risks in the future without action to limit warming.
Adapting to climate change through efforts like flood control measures or droughtresistant crops reduces climate change risks, although this may not be possible with increasing warming.
Poorer countries are responsible for a small share of global emissions, yet they have the least ability to adapt and are most vulnerable to climate change.
Many climate change impacts are already felt at the current 1.2 °C  level of warming.
Additional warming will increase these impacts and can trigger tipping points, such as the melting of the Greenland ice sheet.
Under the 2015 Paris Agreement, nations collectively agreed to keep warming well under 2 °C.
However, with pledges made under the Agreement, global warming would still reach about 2.7 °C  by the end of the century.
Limiting warming to 1.5 °C will require halving emissions by 2030 and achieving netzero emissions by 2050.
Reducing emissions requires generating electricity from lowcarbon sources rather than burning fossil fuels.
This change includes phasing out coal and natural gas fired power plants, vastly increasing use of wind, solar, and other types of renewable energy, and reducing energy use.
Electricity generated from noncarbonemitting sources will need to replace fossil fuels for powering transportation, heating buildings, and operating industrial facilities.
Carbon can also be removed from the atmosphere, for instance by increasing forest cover and by farming with methods that capture carbon in soil.
<Terminology>
Before the 1980s, when it was unclear whether the warming effect of increased greenhouse gases were stronger than the cooling effect of airborne particulates in air pollution, scientists used the term inadvertent climate modification to refer to human impacts on the climate.In the 1980s, the terms global warming and climate change became more common.
Though the two terms are sometimes used interchangeably, scientifically, global warming refers only to increased surface warming, while climate change describes the totality of changes to Earths climate system.
Global warmingused as early as 1975became the more popular term after NASA climate scientist James Hansen used it in his 1988 testimony in the U.S.
Senate.
Since the 2000s, climate change has increased in usage.
Climate change can also refer more broadly to both humancaused changes or natural changes throughout Earths history.Various scientists, politicians and media now use the terms climate crisis or climate emergency to talk about climate change, and global heating instead of global warming.
<Observed temperature rise>
Multiple independent instrumental datasets show that the climate system is warming.
The 2011 to 2020 decade warmed to an average 1.09 °C  compared to the preindustrial baseline .
Surface temperatures are rising by about 0.2 °C per decade, with 2020 reaching a temperature of 1.2 °C above the preindustrial era.
Since 1950, the number of cold days and nights has decreased, and the number of warm days and nights has increased.There was little net warming between the 18th century and the mid19th century.
Climate information for that period comes from climate proxies, such as trees and ice cores.
Thermometer records began to provide global coverage around 1850.
Historical patterns of warming and cooling, like the Medieval Climate Anomaly and the Little Ice Age, did not occur at the same time across different regions.
Temperatures may have reached as high as those of the late20th century in a limited set of regions.
There have been prehistorical episodes of global warming, such as the PaleoceneEocene Thermal Maximum.
However, the modern observed rise in temperature and CO2 concentrations has been so rapid that even abrupt geophysical events in Earths history do not approach current rates.Evidence of warming from air temperature measurements are reinforced with a wide range of other observations.
For example, changes to the natural water cycle have been predicted and observed, such as an increase in the frequency and intensity of heavy precipitation, melting of snow and land ice, and increased atmospheric humidity.
Flora and fauna are also behaving in a manner consistent with warming for instance, plants are flowering earlier in spring.
Another key indicator is the cooling of the upper atmosphere, which demonstrates that greenhouse gases are trapping heat near the Earths surface and preventing it from radiating into space.Regions of the world warm at differing rates.
The pattern is independent of where greenhouse gases are emitted, because the gases persist long enough to diffuse across the planet.
Since the preindustrial period, the average surface temperature over land regions has increased almost twice as fast as the globalaverage surface temperature.
This is because of the larger heat capacity of oceans, and because oceans lose more heat by evaporation.
The thermal energy in the global climate system has grown with only brief pauses since at least 1970, and over 90 of this extra energy has been stored in the ocean.
The rest has heated the atmosphere, melted ice, and warmed the continents.The Northern Hemisphere and the North Pole have warmed much faster than the South Pole and Southern Hemisphere.
The Northern Hemisphere not only has much more land, but also more seasonal snow cover and sea ice.
As these surfaces flip from reflecting a lot of light to being dark after the ice has melted, they start absorbing more heat.
Local black carbon deposits on snow and ice also contribute to Arctic warming.
Arctic temperatures are increasing at over twice the rate of the rest of the world.
Melting of glaciers and ice sheets in the Arctic disrupts ocean circulation, including a weakened Gulf Stream, further changing the climate.
<Attribution of recent temperature rise>
The climate system experiences various cycles on its own which can last for years , decades or even centuries.
Other changes are caused by an imbalance of energy that is external to the climate system, but not always external to the Earth.
Examples of external forcings include changes in the concentrations of greenhouse gases, solar luminosity, volcanic eruptions, and variations in the Earths orbit around the Sun.To determine the human contribution to climate change, known internal climate variability and natural external forcings need to be ruled out.
A key approach is to determine unique fingerprints for all potential causes, then compare these fingerprints with observed patterns of climate change.
For example, solar forcing can be ruled out as a major cause.
Its fingerprint would be warming in the entire atmosphere.
Yet, only the lower atmosphere has warmed, consistent with greenhouse gas forcing.
Attribution of recent climate change shows that the main driver is elevated greenhouse gases, with aerosols having a dampening effect.
<Greenhouse gases>
Greenhouse gases are transparent to sunlight, and thus allow it to pass through the atmosphere to heat the Earths surface.
The Earth radiates it as heat, and greenhouse gases absorb a portion of it.
This absorption slows the rate at which heat escapes into space, trapping heat near the Earths surface and warming it over time.
Before the Industrial Revolution, naturallyoccurring amounts of greenhouse gases caused the air near the surface to be about 33 °C warmer than it would have been in their absence.
While water vapour  and clouds  are the biggest contributors to the greenhouse effect, they increase as a function of temperature and are therefore feedbacks.
On the other hand, concentrations of gases such as CO2 , tropospheric ozone, CFCs and nitrous oxide are not temperaturedependent, and are therefore external forcings.Human activity since the Industrial Revolution, mainly extracting and burning fossil fuels , has increased the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, resulting in a radiative imbalance.
In 2019, the concentrations of CO2 and methane had increased by about 48 and 160, respectively, since 1750.
These CO2 levels are higher than they have been at any time during the last 2 million years.
Concentrations of methane are far higher than they were over the last 800,000 years.
Global anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions in 2019 were equivalent to 59 billion tonnes of CO2.
Of these emissions, 75 was CO2, 18 was methane, 4 was nitrous oxide, and 2 was fluorinated gases.
CO2 emissions primarily come from burning fossil fuels to provide energy for transport, manufacturing, heating, and electricity.
Additional CO2 emissions come from deforestation and industrial processes, which include the CO2 released by the chemical reactions for making cement, steel, aluminum, and fertiliser.
Methane emissions come from livestock, manure, rice cultivation, landfills, wastewater, and coal mining, as well as oil and gas extraction.
Nitrous oxide emissions largely come from the microbial decomposition of fertiliser.Despite the contribution of deforestation to greenhouse gas emissions, the Earths land surface, particularly its forests, remain a significant carbon sink for CO2.
Landsurface sink processes, such as carbon fixation in the soil and photosynthesis, remove about 29 of annual global CO2 emissions.
The ocean also serves as a significant carbon sink via a twostep process.
First, CO2 dissolves in the surface water.
Afterwards, the oceans overturning circulation distributes it deep into the oceans interior, where it accumulates over time as part of the carbon cycle.
Over the last two decades, the worlds oceans have absorbed 20 to 30 of emitted CO2.
<Aerosols and clouds>
Air pollution, in the form of aerosols, affects the climate on a large scale.
Aerosols scatter and absorb solar radiation.
From 1961 to 1990, a gradual reduction in the amount of sunlight reaching the Earths surface was observed.
This phenomenon is popularly known as global dimming, and is attributed to aerosols produced by dust, pollution and combustion of biofuels and fossil fuels.
Globally, aerosols have been declining since 1990 due to pollution controls, meaning that they no longer mask greenhouse gas warming as much.Aerosols also have indirect effects on the Earths radiation budget.
Sulfate aerosols act as cloud condensation nuclei and lead to clouds that have more and smaller cloud droplets.
These clouds reflect solar radiation more efficiently than clouds with fewer and larger droplets.
They also reduce the growth of raindrops, which makes clouds more reflective to incoming sunlight.
Indirect effects of aerosols are the largest uncertainty in radiative forcing.While aerosols typically limit global warming by reflecting sunlight, black carbon in soot that falls on snow or ice can contribute to global warming.
Not only does this increase the absorption of sunlight, it also increases melting and sealevel rise.
Limiting new black carbon deposits in the Arctic could reduce global warming by 0.2 °C by 2050.
<Land surface changes>
Humans change the Earths surface mainly to create more agricultural land.
Today, agriculture takes up 34 of Earths land area, while 26 is forests, and 30 is uninhabitable .
The amount of forested land continues to decrease, which is the main land use change that causes global warming.
Deforestation releases CO2 contained in trees when they are destroyed, plus it prevents those trees from absorbing more CO2 in the future.
The main causes of deforestation are permanent landuse change from forest to agricultural land producing products such as beef and palm oil , logging to produce forestryforest products , short term shifting cultivation , and wildfires .The type of vegetation in a region affects the local temperature.
It impacts how much of the sunlight gets reflected back into space , and how much heat is lost by evaporation.
For instance, the change from a dark forest to grassland makes the surface lighter, causing it to reflect more sunlight.
Deforestation can also affect temperatures by modifying the release of chemical compounds that influence clouds, and by changing wind patterns.
In tropic and temperate areas the net effect is to produce significant warming, while at latitudes closer to the poles a gain of albedo  leads to a cooling effect.
Globally, these effects are estimated to have led to a slight cooling, dominated by an increase in surface albedo.
According to FAO, forest degradation aggravates the impacts of climate change as it reduces the carbon sequestration abilities of forests.
Indeed, among their many benefits, forests also have the potential to reduce the impact of high temperatures.
<Solar and volcanic activity>
As the Sun is the Earths primary energy source, changes in incoming sunlight directly affect the climate system.
Solar irradiance has been measured directly by satellites, and indirect measurements are available from the early 1600s onwards.
There has been no upward trend in the amount of the Suns energy reaching the Earth.Explosive volcanic eruptions represent the largest natural forcing over the industrial era.
When the eruption is sufficiently strong , sunlight can be partially blocked for a couple of years.
The temperature signal lasts about twice as long.
In the industrial era, volcanic activity has had negligible impacts on global temperature trends.
Presentday volcanic CO2 emissions are equivalent to less than 1 of current anthropogenic CO2 emissions.Physical climate models are unable to reproduce the rapid warming observed in recent decades when taking into account only variations in solar output and volcanic activity.
Further evidence for greenhouse gases causing global warming comes from measurements that show a warming of the lower atmosphere , coupled with a cooling of the upper atmosphere .
If solar variations were responsible for the observed warming, the troposphere and stratosphere would both warm.
<Climate change feedback>
The response of the climate system to an initial forcing is modified by feedbacks increased by selfreinforcing or positive feedbacks and reduced by balancing or negative feedbacks.
The main reinforcing feedbacks are the watervapour feedback, the icealbedo feedback, and the net effect of clouds.
The primary balancing mechanism is radiative cooling, as Earths surface gives off more heat to space in response to rising temperature.
In addition to temperature feedbacks, there are feedbacks in the carbon cycle, such as the fertilizing effect of CO2 on plant growth.
Uncertainty over feedbacks is the major reason why different climate models project different magnitudes of warming for a given amount of emissions.As air warms, it can hold more moisture.
Water vapour, as a potent greenhouse gas, holds heat in the atmosphere.
If cloud cover increases, more sunlight will be reflected back into space, cooling the planet.
If clouds become higher and thinner, they act as an insulator, reflecting heat from below back downwards and warming the planet.
The effect of clouds is the largest source of feedback uncertainty.Another major feedback is the reduction of snow cover and sea ice in the Arctic, which reduces the reflectivity of the Earths surface.
More of the Suns energy is now absorbed in these regions, contributing to amplification of Arctic temperature changes.
Arctic amplification is also melting permafrost, which releases methane and CO2 into the atmosphere.
Climate change can also cause methane releases from wetlands, marine systems, and freshwater systems.
Overall, climate feedbacks are expected to become increasingly positive.Around half of humancaused CO2 emissions have been absorbed by land plants and by the oceans.
On land, elevated CO2 and an extended growing season have stimulated plant growth.
Climate change increases droughts and heat waves that inhibit plant growth, which makes it uncertain whether this carbon sink will continue to grow in the future.
Soils contain large quantities of carbon and may release some when they heat up.
As more CO2 and heat are absorbed by the ocean, it acidifies, its circulation changes and phytoplankton takes up less carbon, decreasing the rate at which the ocean absorbs atmospheric carbon.
Overall, at higher CO2 concentrations the Earth will absorb a reduced fraction of our emissions.
<Modelling>
A climate model is a representation of the physical, chemical, and biological processes that affect the climate system.  Models also include natural processes like changes in the Earths orbit, historical changes in the Suns activity, and volcanic forcing.
Models are used to estimate the degree of warming future emissions will cause when accounting for the strength of climate feedbacks, or reproduce and predict the circulation of the oceans, the annual cycle of the seasons, and the flows of carbon between the land surface and the atmosphere.The physical realism of models is tested by examining their ability to simulate contemporary or past climates.
Past models have underestimated the rate of Arctic shrinkage and underestimated the rate of precipitation increase.
Sea level rise since 1990 was underestimated in older models, but more recent models agree well with observations.
The 2017 United Statespublished National Climate Assessment notes that climate models may still be underestimating or missing relevant feedback processes.A subset of climate models add societal factors to a simple physical climate model.
These models simulate how population, economic growth, and energy use affect  and interact with  the physical climate.
With this information, these models can produce scenarios of future greenhouse gas emissions.
This is then used as input for physical climate models and carbon cycle models to predict how atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases might change in the future.
Depending on the socioeconomic scenario and the mitigation scenario, models produce atmospheric CO2 concentrations that range widely between 380 and 1400 ppm.The IPCC Sixth Assessment Report projects that global warming is very likely to reach 1.0 °C to 1.8 °C by the late 21st century under the very low GHG emissions scenario.
In an intermediate scenario global warming would reach 2.1 °C to 3.5 °C, and 3.3 °C to 5.7 °C under the very high GHG emissions scenario.
These projections are based on climate models in combination with observations.The remaining carbon budget is determined by modelling the carbon cycle and the climate sensitivity to greenhouse gases.
According to the IPCC, global warming can be kept below 1.5 °C with a twothirds chance if emissions after 2018 do not exceed 420 or 570 gigatonnes of CO2.
This corresponds to 10 to 13 years of current emissions.
There are high uncertainties about the budget.
For instance, it may be 100 gigatonnes of CO2 smaller due to methane release from permafrost and wetlands.
However, it is clear that fossil fuel resources are too abundant for shortages to be relied on to limit carbon emissions in the 21st century.
<Impacts>
<Environmental effects>
The environmental effects of climate change are broad and farreaching, affecting oceans, ice, and weather.
Changes may occur gradually or rapidly.
Evidence for these effects comes from studying climate change in the past, from modelling, and from modern observations.
Since the 1950s, droughts and heat waves have appeared simultaneously with increasing frequency.
Extremely wet or dry events within the monsoon period have increased in India and East Asia.
The rainfall rate and intensity of hurricanes and typhoons is likely increasing, and the geographic range likely expanding poleward in response to climate warming.
Frequency of tropical cyclones has not increased as a result of climate change.
Global sea level is rising as a consequence of glacial melt, melt of the ice sheets in Greenland and Antarctica, and thermal expansion.
Between 1993 and 2020, the rise increased over time, averaging 3.3  0.3 mm per year.
Over the 21st century, the IPCC projects that in a very high emissions scenario the sea level could rise by 61 to 110 cm.
Increased ocean warmth is undermining and threatening to unplug Antarctic glacier outlets, risking a large melt of the ice sheet and the possibility of a 2meter sea level rise by 2100 under high emissions.Climate change has led to decades of shrinking and thinning of the Arctic sea ice.
While icefree summers are expected to be rare at 1.5 °C degrees of warming, they are set to occur once every three to ten years at a warming level of 2 °C.
Higher atmospheric CO2 concentrations have led to changes in ocean chemistry.
An increase in dissolved CO2 is causing oceans to acidify.
In addition, oxygen levels are decreasing as oxygen is less soluble in warmer water.
Dead zones in the ocean, regions with very little oxygen, are expanding too.
<Tipping points and longterm impacts>
Greater degrees of global warming increase the risk of passing through tipping pointsthresholds beyond which certain impacts can no longer be avoided even if temperatures are reduced.
An example is the collapse of West Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets, where a temperature rise of 1.5 to 2 °C may commit the ice sheets to melt, although the time scale of melt is uncertain and depends on future warming.
Some largescale changes could occur over a short time period, such as a shutdown of certain ocean currents like the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation .
Tipping points can also include irreversible damage to ecosystems like the Amazon rainforest and coral reefs.The longterm effects of climate change on oceans include further ice melt, ocean warming, sea level rise, and ocean acidification.
On the timescale of centuries to millennia, the magnitude of climate change will be determined primarily by anthropogenic CO2 emissions.
This is due to CO2s long atmospheric lifetime.
Oceanic CO2 uptake is slow enough that ocean acidification will continue for hundreds to thousands of years.
These emissions are estimated to have prolonged the current interglacial period by at least 100,000 years.
Sea level rise will continue over many centuries, with an estimated rise of 2.3 metres per degree Celsius  after 2000 years.
<Nature and wildlife>
Recent warming has driven many terrestrial and freshwater species poleward and towards higher altitudes.
Higher atmospheric CO2 levels and an extended growing season have resulted in global greening.
However, heatwaves and drought have reduced ecosystem productivity in some regions.
The future balance of these opposing effects is unclear.
Climate change has contributed to the expansion of drier climate zones, such as the expansion of deserts in the subtropics.
The size and speed of global warming is making abrupt changes in ecosystems more likely.
Overall, it is expected that climate change will result in the extinction of many species.The oceans have heated more slowly than the land, but plants and animals in the ocean have migrated towards the colder poles faster than species on land.
Just as on land, heat waves in the ocean occur more frequently due to climate change, harming a wide range of organisms such as corals, kelp, and seabirds.
Ocean acidification makes it harder for marine calcifying organisms such as mussels, barnacles and corals to produce shells and skeletons and heatwaves have bleached coral reefs.
Harmful algal blooms enhanced by climate change and eutrophication lower oxygen levels, disrupt food webs and cause great loss of marine life.
Coastal ecosystems are under particular stress.
Almost half of global wetlands have disappeared due to climate change and other human impacts.
<Humans>
The effects of climate change are impacting humans everywhere in the world.
Impacts can now be observed on all continents and ocean regions, with lowlatitude, less developed areas facing the greatest risk.
Continued warming has potentially severe, pervasive and irreversible impacts for people and ecosystems.
The risks are unevenly distributed, but are generally greater for disadvantaged people in developing and developed countries.
<Food and health>
The WHO has classified climate change as the greatest threat to global health in the 21st century.
Extreme weather leads to injury and loss of life, and crop failures to undernutrition.
Various infectious diseases are more easily transmitted in a warmer climate, such as dengue fever and malaria.
Young children are the most vulnerable to food shortages.
Both children and older people are vulnerable to extreme heat.
The World Health Organization  has estimated that between 2030 and 2050, climate change would cause around 250,000 additional deaths per year.
They assessed deaths from heat exposure in elderly people, increases in diarrhea, malaria, dengue, coastal flooding, and childhood undernutrition.
Over 500,000 more adult deaths are projected yearly by 2050 due to reductions in food availability and quality.
By 2100, 50 to 75 of the global population may face climate conditions that are lifethreatening due to combined effects of extreme heat and humidity.Climate change is affecting food security.
It has caused reduction in global yields of maize, wheat, and soybeans between 1981 and 2010.
Future warming could further reduce global yields of major crops.
Crop production will probably be negatively affected in lowlatitude countries, while effects at northern latitudes may be positive or negative.
Up to an additional 183 million people worldwide, particularly those with lower incomes, are at risk of hunger as a consequence of these impacts.
Climate change also impacts fish populations.
Globally, less will be available to be fished.
Regions dependent on glacier water, regions that are already dry, and small islands have a higher risk of water stress due to climate change.
<Livelihoods>
Economic damages due to climate change may be severe and there is a chance of disastrous consequences.
Climate change has likely already increased global economic inequality, and this trend is projected to continue.
Most of the severe impacts are expected in subSaharan Africa, where most of the local inhabitants are dependent upon natural and agricultural resources and SouthEast Asia.
The World Bank estimates that climate change could drive over 120 million people into poverty by 2030.Current inequalities based on wealth and social status have worsened due to climate change.
Major difficulties in mitigating, adapting, and recovering to climate shocks are faced by marginalized people who have less control over resources.
Indigenous people, who are subsistent on their land and ecosystems, will face endangerment to their wellness and lifestyles due to climate change.
An expert elicitation concluded that the role of climate change in armed conflict has been small compared to factors such as socioeconomic inequality and state capabilities.Lowlying islands and coastal communities are threatened by sea level rise, which makes flooding more common.
Sometimes, land is permanently lost to the sea.
This could lead to statelessness for people in island nations, such as the Maldives and Tuvalu.
In some regions, the rise in temperature and humidity may be too severe for humans to adapt to.
With worstcase climate change, models project that almost onethird of humanity might live in extremely hot and uninhabitable climates, similar to the current climate found in the Sahara.
These factors can drive environmental migration, both within and between countries.
More people are expected to be displaced because of sea level rise, extreme weather and conflict from increased competition over natural resources.
Climate change may also increase vulnerability, leading to trapped populations who are not able to move due to a lack of resources.
<Reducing and recapturing emissions>
Climate change can be mitigated by reducing greenhouse gas emissions and enhancing sinks that absorb greenhouse gases from the atmosphere.
In order to limit global warming to less than 1.5 °C global greenhouse gas emissions needs to be netzero by 2050, or by 2070 with a 2 °C target.
This requires farreaching, systemic changes on an unprecedented scale in energy, land, cities, transport, buildings, and industry.
The United Nations Environment Programme estimates that countries need to triple their pledges under the Paris Agreement within the next decade to limit global warming to 2 °C.
An even greater level of reduction is required to meet the 1.5 °C goal.
With pledges made under the Agreement as of October 2021, global warming would still have a 66 chance of reaching about 2.7 °C  by the end of the century.
Globally, limiting warming to 2 °C may result in higher benefits than costs.Although there is no single pathway to limit global warming to 1.5 or 2 °C, most scenarios and strategies see a major increase in the use of renewable energy in combination with increased energy efficiency measures to generate the needed greenhouse gas reductions.
To reduce pressures on ecosystems and enhance their carbon sequestration capabilities, changes would also be necessary in agriculture and forestry, such as preventing deforestation and restoring natural ecosystems by reforestation.Other approaches to mitigating climate change have a higher level of risk.
Scenarios that limit global warming to 1.5 °C typically project the largescale use of carbon dioxide removal methods over the 21st century.
There are concerns, though, about overreliance on these technologies, and environmental impacts.
Solar radiation modification  is also a possible supplement to deep reductions in emissions.
However, SRM would raise significant ethical and legal issues, and the risks are poorly understood.
<Clean energy>
Renewable energy is key to limiting climate change.
Fossil fuels accounted for 80 of the worlds energy in 2018.
The remaining share was split between nuclear power and renewables .
That mix is projected to change significantly over the next 30 years.
Solar panels and onshore wind are now among the cheapest forms of adding new power generation capacity in many locations.
Renewables represented 75 of all new electricity generation installed in 2019, nearly all solar and wind.
Other forms of clean energy, such as nuclear and hydropower, currently have a larger share of the energy supply.
However, their future growth forecasts appear limited in comparison.To achieve carbon neutrality by 2050, renewable energy would become the dominant form of electricity generation, rising to 85 or more by 2050 in some scenarios.
Investment in coal would be eliminated and coal use nearly phased out by 2050.Electricity generated from renewable sources would also need to become the main energy source for heating and transport.
Transport can switch away from internal combustion engine vehicles and towards electric vehicles, public transit, and active transport .
For shipping and flying, lowcarbon fuels would reduce emissions.
Heating could be increasingly decarbonised with technologies like heat pumps.There are obstacles to the continued rapid growth of clean energy, including renewables.
For wind and solar, there are environmental and land use concerns for new projects.
Wind and solar also produce energy intermittently and with seasonal variability.
Traditionally, hydro dams with reservoirs and conventional power plants have been used when variable energy production is low.
Going forward, battery storage can be expanded, energy demand and supply can be matched, and longdistance transmission can smooth variability of renewable outputs.
Bioenergy is often not carbonneutral and may have negative consequences for food security.
The growth of nuclear power is constrained by controversy around nuclear waste, nuclear weapon proliferation, and accidents.
Hydropower growth is limited by the fact that the best sites have been developed, and new projects are confronting increased social and environmental concerns.Lowcarbon energy improves human health by minimising climate change.
It also has the nearterm benefit of reducing air pollution deaths, which were estimated at 7 million annually in 2016.
Meeting the Paris Agreement goals that limit warming to a 2 °C increase could save about a million of those lives per year by 2050, whereas limiting global warming to 1.5 °C could save millions and simultaneously increase energy security and reduce poverty.
Improving air quality also has economic benefits which may be larger than mitigation costs.
<Energy conservation>
Reducing energy demand is another major aspect of reducing emissions.
If less energy is needed, there is more flexibility for clean energy development.
It also makes it easier to manage the electricity grid, and minimises carbonintensive infrastructure development.
Major increases in energy efficiency investment will be required to achieve climate goals, comparable to the level of investment in renewable energy.
Several COVID19 related changes in energy use patterns, energy efficiency investments, and funding have made forecasts for this decade more difficult and uncertain.Strategies to reduce energy demand vary by sector.
In transport, passengers and freight can switch to more efficient travel modes, such as buses and trains, or use electric vehicles.
Industrial strategies to reduce energy demand include improving heating systems and motors, designing less energyintensive products, and increasing product lifetimes.
In the building sector the focus is on better design of new buildings, and higher levels of energy efficiency in retrofitting.
The use of technologies like heat pumps can also increase building energy efficiency.
<Agriculture and industry>
Agriculture and forestry face a triple challenge of limiting greenhouse gas emissions, preventing the further conversion of forests to agricultural land, and meeting increases in world food demand.
A set of actions could reduce agriculture and forestrybased emissions by two thirds from 2010 levels.
These include reducing growth in demand for food and other agricultural products, increasing land productivity, protecting and restoring forests, and reducing greenhouse gas emissions from agricultural production.On the demand side, a key component of reducing emissions is shifting people towards plantbased diets.
Eliminating the production of livestock for meat and dairy would eliminate about 34ths of all emissions from agriculture and other land use.
Livestock also occupy 37 of icefree land area on Earth and consume feed from the 12 of land area used for crops, driving deforestation and land degradation.Steel and cement production are responsible for about 13 of industrial CO2 emissions.
In these industries, carbonintensive materials such as coke and lime play an integral role in the production, so that reducing CO2 emissions requires research into alternative chemistries.
<Carbon sequestration>
Natural carbon sinks can be enhanced to sequester significantly larger amounts of CO2 beyond naturally occurring levels.
Reforestation and tree planting on nonforest lands are among the most mature sequestration techniques, although the latter raises food security concerns.
Farmers can promote sequestration of carbon in soils through practices such as use of winter cover crops, reducing the intensity and frequency of tillage, and using compost and manure as soil amendments.
In one of its recent publications, FAO maintains that forest and landscape restoration yields many benefits for the climate, including greenhouse gas emissions sequestration and reduction.
Restorationrecreation of coastal wetlands and seagrass meadows increases the uptake of carbon into organic matter .
When carbon is sequestered in soils and in organic matter such as trees, there is a risk of the carbon being rereleased into the atmosphere later through changes in land use, fire, or other changes in ecosystems.Where energy production or CO2intensive heavy industries continue to produce waste CO2, the gas can be captured and stored instead of released to the atmosphere.
Although its current use is limited in scale and expensive, carbon capture and storage  may be able to play a significant role in limiting CO2 emissions by midcentury.
This technique, in combination with bioenergy  can result in net negative emissions CO2 is drawn from the atmosphere.
It remains highly uncertain whether carbon dioxide removal techniques will be able to play a large role in limiting warming to 1.5 °C.
Policy decisions that rely on carbon dioxide removal increase the risk of global warming rising beyond international goals.
<Adaptation>
Adaptation is the process of adjustment to current or expected changes in climate and its effects.
5  Without additional mitigation, adaptation cannot avert the risk of severe, widespread and irreversible impacts.
More severe climate change requires more transformative adaptation, which can be prohibitively expensive.
The capacity and potential for humans to adapt is unevenly distributed across different regions and populations, and developing countries generally have less.
The first two decades of the 21st century saw an increase in adaptive capacity in most low and middleincome countries with improved access to basic sanitation and electricity, but progress is slow.
Many countries have implemented adaptation policies.
However, there is a considerable gap between necessary and available finance.Adaptation to sea level rise consists of avoiding atrisk areas, learning to live with increased flooding and protection.
If that fails, managed retreat may be needed.
There are economic barriers for tackling dangerous heat impact.
Avoiding strenuous work or having air conditioning is not possible for everybody.
In agriculture, adaptation options include a switch to more sustainable diets, diversification, erosion control and genetic improvements for increased tolerance to a changing climate.
Insurance allows for risksharing, but is often difficult to get for people on lower incomes.
Education, migration and early warning systems can reduce climate vulnerability.
Planting mangroves or encouraging other coastal vegetation can buffer storms.Ecosystems adapt to climate change, a process that can be supported by human intervention.
By increasing connectivity between ecosystems, species can migrate to more favourable climate conditions.
Species can also be introduced to areas acquiring a favorable climate.
Protection and restoration of natural and seminatural areas helps build resilience, making it easier for ecosystems to adapt.
Many of the actions that promote adaptation in ecosystems, also help humans adapt via ecosystembased adaptation.
For instance, restoration of natural fire regimes makes catastrophic fires less likely, and reduces human exposure.
Giving rivers more space allows for more water storage in the natural system, reducing flood risk.
Restored forest acts as a carbon sink, but planting trees in unsuitable regions can exacerbate climate impacts.There are synergies but also tradeoffs between adaptation and mitigation.
Adaptation often offer shortterm benefits, whereas mitigation has longerterm benefits.
Two examples for tradeoffs include Increased use of air conditioning allows people to better cope with heat, but increases energy demand.
Compact urban development may lead to reduced emissions from transport and construction.
At the same time, this kind of urban development may increase the urban heat island effect, leading to higher temperatures and increased exposure.
An example for synergy is increased food productivity which has large benefits for both adaptation and mitigation.
<Policies and politics>
Countries that are most vulnerable to climate change have typically been responsible for a small share of global emissions.
This raises questions about justice and fairness.
Climate change is strongly linked to sustainable development.
Limiting global warming makes it easier to achieve sustainable development goals, such as eradicating poverty and reducing inequalities.
The connection is recognised in Sustainable Development Goal 13 which is to take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts.
The goals on food, clean water and ecosystem protection have synergies with climate mitigation.The geopolitics of climate change is complex.
It has often been framed as a freerider problem, in which all countries benefit from mitigation done by other countries, but individual countries would lose from switching to a lowcarbon economy themselves.
This framing has been challenged.
For instance, the benefits of a coal phaseout to public health and local environments exceed the costs in almost all regions.
Furthermore, net importers of fossil fuels win economically from switching to clean energy, causing net exporters to face stranded assets fossil fuels they cannot sell.
<Policy options>
A wide range of policies, regulations, and laws are being used to reduce emissions.
As of 2019, carbon pricing covers about 20 of global greenhouse gas emissions.
Carbon can be priced with carbon taxes and emissions trading systems.
Direct global fossil fuel subsidies reached 319 billion in 2017, and 5.2 trillion when indirect costs such as air pollution are priced in.
Ending these can cause a 28 reduction in global carbon emissions and a 46 reduction in air pollution deaths.
Money saved on fossil subsidies could be used to support the transition to clean energy instead.
More direct methods to reduce greenhouse gases include vehicle efficiency standards, renewable fuel standards, and air pollution regulations on heavy industry.
Several countries require utilities to increase the share of renewables in power production.Policy designed through the lens of climate justice tries to address human rights issues and social inequality.
For instance, wealthy nations responsible for the largest share of emissions would have to pay poorer countries to adapt.
As the use of fossil fuels is reduced, jobs in the sector are being lost.
To achieve a just transition, these people would need to be retrained for other jobs.
Communities with many fossil fuel workers would need additional investments.
<International climate agreements>
Nearly all countries in the world are parties to the 1994 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change .
The goal of the UNFCCC is to prevent dangerous human interference with the climate system.
As stated in the convention, this requires that greenhouse gas concentrations are stabilised in the atmosphere at a level where ecosystems can adapt naturally to climate change, food production is not threatened, and economic development can be sustained.
The UNFCCC does not itself restrict emissions but rather provides a framework for protocols that do.
Global emissions have risen since the UNFCCC was signed.
Its yearly conferences are the stage of global negotiations.The 1997 Kyoto Protocol extended the UNFCCC and included legally binding commitments for most developed countries to limit their emissions.
During the negotiations, the G77  pushed for a mandate requiring developed countries to  the lead in reducing their emissions, since developed countries contributed most to the accumulation of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
Percapita emissions were also still relatively low in developing countries and developing countries would need to emit more to meet their development needs.The 2009 Copenhagen Accord has been widely portrayed as disappointing because of its low goals, and was rejected by poorer nations including the G77.
Associated parties aimed to limit the global temperature rise to below 2 °C.
The Accord set the goal of sending 100 billion per year to developing countries for mitigation and adaptation by 2020, and proposed the founding of the Green Climate Fund.
As of 2020, the fund has failed to reach its expected target, and risks a shrinkage in its funding.In 2015 all UN countries negotiated the Paris Agreement, which aims to keep global warming well below 2.0 °C and contains an aspirational goal of keeping warming under 1.5 °C.
The agreement replaced the Kyoto Protocol.
Unlike Kyoto, no binding emission targets were set in the Paris Agreement.
Instead, a set of procedures was made binding.
Countries have to regularly set ever more ambitious goals and reevaluate these goals every five years.
The Paris Agreement restated that developing countries must be financially supported.
As of October 2021, 194 states and the European Union have signed the treaty and 191 states and the EU have ratified or acceded to the agreement.The 1987 Montreal Protocol, an international agreement to stop emitting ozonedepleting gases, may have been more effective at curbing greenhouse gas emissions than the Kyoto Protocol specifically designed to do so.
The 2016 Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol aims to reduce the emissions of hydrofluorocarbons, a group of powerful greenhouse gases which served as a replacement for banned ozonedepleting gases.
This made the Montreal Protocol a stronger agreement against climate change.
<National responses>
In 2019, the United Kingdom parliament became the first national government to declare a climate emergency.
Other countries and jurisdictions followed suit.
That same year, the European Parliament declared a climate and environmental emergency.
The European Commission presented its European Green Deal with the goal of making the EU carbonneutral by 2050.
Major countries in Asia have made similar pledges South Korea and Japan have committed to become carbonneutral by 2050, and China by 2060.
In 2021, the European Commission released its Fit for 55 legislation package, which contains guidelines for the car industry all new cars on the European market must be zeroemission vehicles from 2035.
While India has strong incentives for renewables, it also plans a significant expansion of coal in the country.
Vietnam is among very few coaldependent fast developing countries that pledged to phase out unabated coal power by the 2040s or as soon as possible there after.As of 2021, based on information from 48 national climate plans, which represent 40 of the parties to the Paris Agreement, estimated total greenhouse gas emissions will be 0.5 lower compared to 2010 levels, below the 45 or 25 reduction goals to limit global warming to 1.5 °C or 2 °C, respectively.
<Society>
<Denial and misinformation>
Public debate about climate change has been strongly affected by climate change denial and misinformation, which originated in the United States and has since spread to other countries, particularly Canada and Australia.
The actors behind climate change denial form a wellfunded and relatively coordinated coalition of fossil fuel companies, industry groups, conservative think tanks, and contrarian scientists.
Like the tobacco industry, the main strategy of these groups has been to manufacture doubt about scientific data and results.
Many who deny, dismiss, or hold unwarranted doubt about the scientific consensus on anthropogenic climate change are labelled as climate change skeptics, which several scientists have noted is a misnomer.There are different variants of climate denial some deny that warming takes place at all, some acknowledge warming but attribute it to natural influences, and some minimise the negative impacts of climate change.
Manufacturing uncertainty about the science later developed into a manufactured controversy creating the belief that there is significant uncertainty about climate change within the scientific community in order to delay policy changes.
Strategies to promote these ideas include criticism of scientific institutions, and questioning the motives of individual scientists.
An echo chamber of climatedenying blogs and media has further fomented misunderstanding of climate change.
<Public awareness and opinion>
Climate change came to international public attention in the late 1980s.
Due to media coverage in the early 1990s, people often confused climate change with other environmental issues like ozone depletion.
In popular culture, the climate fiction movie The Day After Tomorrow  and the Al Gore documentary An Inconvenient Truth  focused on climate change.Significant regional, gender, age and political differences exist in both public concern for, and understanding of, climate change.
More highly educated people, and in some countries, women and younger people, were more likely to see climate change as a serious threat.
Partisan gaps also exist in many countries, and countries with high CO2 emissions tend to be less concerned.
Views on causes of climate change vary widely between countries.
Concern has increased over time, to the point where in 2021 a majority of citizens in many countries express a high level of worry about climate change, or view it as a global emergency.
Higher levels of worry are associated with stronger public support for policies that address climate change.
<Climate movement>
Climate protests demand that political leaders take action to prevent climate change.
They can take the form of public demonstrations, fossil fuel divestment, lawsuits and other activities.
Prominent demonstrations include the School Strike for Climate.
In this initiative, young people across the globe have been protesting since 2018 by skipping school on Fridays, inspired by Swedish teenager Greta Thunberg.
Mass civil disobedience actions by groups like Extinction Rebellion have protested by disrupting roads and public transport.
Litigation is increasingly used as a tool to strengthen climate action from public institutions and companies.
Activists also initiate lawsuits which target governments and demand that they take ambitious action or enforce existing laws on climate change.
Lawsuits against fossilfuel companies generally seek compensation for loss and damage.
<History>
<Early discoveries>
Scientists in the 19th century such as Alexander von Humboldt began to foresee the effects of climate change.
In the 1820s, Joseph Fourier proposed the greenhouse effect to explain why Earths temperature was higher than the suns energy alone could explain.
Earths atmosphere is transparent to sunlight, so sunlight reaches the surface where it is converted to heat.
However, the atmosphere is not transparent to heat radiating from the surface, and captures some of that heat, which in turn warms the planet.In 1856 Eunice Newton Foote demonstrated that the warming effect of the sun is greater for air with water vapour than for dry air, and that the effect is even greater with carbon dioxide .
She concluded that An atmosphere of that gas would give to our earth a high temperature...Starting in 1859, John Tyndall established that nitrogen and oxygentogether totaling 99 of dry airare transparent to radiated heat.
However, water vapour and gases such as methane and carbon dioxide absorb radiated heat and reradiate that heat into the atmosphere.
Tyndall proposed that changes in the concentrations of these gases may have caused climatic changes in the past, including ice ages.Svante Arrhenius noted that water vapour in air continuously varied, but the CO2 concentration in air was influenced by longterm geological processes.
Warming from increased CO2 levels would increase the amount of water vapour, amplifying warming in a positive feedback loop.
In 1896, he published the first climate model of its kind, projecting that halving CO2 levels could have produced a drop in temperature initiating an ice age.
Arrhenius calculated the temperature increase expected from doubling CO2 to be around 5 to 6 °C.
Other scientists were initially skeptical and believed that the greenhouse effect was saturated so that adding more CO2 would make no difference, and that the climate would be selfregulating.
Beginning in 1938, Guy Stewart Callendar published evidence that climate was warming and CO2 levels were rising, but his calculations met the same objections.
<Development of a scientific consensus>
In the 1950s, Gilbert Plass created a detailed computer model that included different atmospheric layers and the infrared spectrum.
This model predicted that increasing CO2 levels would cause warming.
Around the same time, Hans Suess found evidence that CO2 levels had been rising, and Roger Revelle showed that the oceans would not absorb the increase.
The two scientists subsequently helped Charles Keeling to begin a record of continued increase, which has been termed the Keeling Curve.
Scientists alerted the public, and the dangers were highlighted at James Hansens 1988 Congressional testimony.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , set up in 1988 to provide formal advice to the worlds governments, spurred interdisciplinary research.
As part of the IPCC reports, scientists assess the scientific discussion that takes place in peerreviewed journal articles.There is a nearcomplete scientific consensus that the climate is warming and that this is caused by human activities.
As of 2019, agreement in recent literature reached over 99.
No scientific body of national or international standing disagrees with this view.
Consensus has further developed that some form of action should be taken to protect people against the impacts of climate change.
National science academies have called on world leaders to cut global emissions.
The 2021 IPCC Assessment Report stated that it is unequivocal that climate change is caused by humans.
